THE METAMORPHOSES OF OVID *** All Greek words have mouse-hover transliterations: Δηοῦς κόρη . The text is based on two reprints of the 1851 Riley translation: Bell
(1893, London) and McKay (1899, Philadelphia). Page and line numbers in
the left margin refer to Bell; numbers in the right margin are from
McKay. Details about the texts are given at the
end of this file, along with notes on errors and footnote numbering . The Metamorphoses of Ovid Books I-VII Translated by Henry T. Riley The METAMORPHOSES of OVID. Literally Translated into English Prose, with Copious Notes and
Explanations, BY HENRY T. RILEY, B.A. of Clare Hall, Cambridge. London: George Bell & Sons, York St., Covent Garden, and New York. 1893. The METAMORPHOSES OF OVID Vol. I—Books I-VII Literally Translated with Notes and Explanations by HENRY T. RILEY, M.A. With an Introduction by EDWARD BROOKS, JR. London: Reprinted from the Stereotype Plates by Wm. Clowes & Sons, Ltd.,
Stamford Street and Charing Cross. Copyright, 1899, By David McKay press of Sherman & Co ., Philadelphia Contents Introductory Material from Bell edition: Introduction “Synoptical View” : Book I Book II Book III Book IV Book V Book VI Book VII Introductory Material from McKay edition: Introduction by Edward Brooks, Jr. Advertising (last page of volume) The Metamorphoses of Ovid Books I-III Book I Book II Book III Books IV-VII Book IV Book V Book VI Book VII Introductory material from 1893 Bell edition, omitting synopses of
Books VIII-XV: iii INTRODUCTION. The Metamorphoses of Ovid are a
compendium of the Mythological narratives of ancient Greece and Rome, so
ingeniously framed, as to embrace a large amount of information upon
almost every subject connected with the learning, traditions, manners,
and customs of antiquity, and have afforded a fertile field of
investigation to the learned of the civilized world. To present to the
public a faithful translation of a work, universally esteemed, not only
for its varied information, but as being the masterpiece of one of the
greatest Poets of ancient Rome, is the object of the present volume. To render the work, which, from its nature and design, must, of
necessity, be replete with matter of obscure meaning, more inviting to
the scholar, and more intelligible to those who are unversed in
Classical literature, the translation is accompanied with Notes and
Explanations, which, it is believed, will be found to throw considerable
light upon the origin and meaning of some of the traditions of heathen
Mythology. In the translation, the text of the Delphin edition has been
generally adopted; and no deviation has been made from it, except in a
few instances, where the reason for such a step is stated in the notes;
at the same time, the texts of Burmann and Gierig have throughout been
carefully consulted. The several editions vary materially in respect to
punctuation; the Translator has consequently used his own discretion in
adopting that which seemed to him the most fully to convey in each
passage the intended meaning of the writer. The Metamorphoses of Ovid have been frequently translated into the
English language. On referring to Mr. Bohn’s excellent Catalogue of the
Greek and Latin Classics and their Translations, we find that the whole
of the work has been twice translated into English Prose, while five
translations in Verse are there enumerated. A prose version of the
Metamorphoses was published by Joseph Davidson, about the iv middle of the last century, which professes to be “as near the original
as the different idioms of the Latin and English will allow;” and to be
“printed for the use of schools, as well as of private gentlemen.”
A few moments’ perusal of this work will satisfy the reader that it
has not the slightest pretension to be considered a literal translation,
while, by its departure from the strict letter of the author, it has
gained nothing in elegance of diction. It is accompanied by “critical,
historical, geographical, and classical notes in English, from the best
Commentators, both ancient and modern, beside a great number of notes,
entirely new;” but notwithstanding this announcement, these annotations
will be found to be but few in number, and, with some exceptions in the
early part of the volume, to throw very little light on the obscurities
of the text. A fifth edition of this translation was published so
recently as 1822, but without any improvement, beyond the furbishing up
of the old-fashioned language of the original preface. A far more
literal translation of the Metamorphoses is that by John Clarke, which
was first published about the year 1735, and had attained to a seventh
edition in 1779. Although this version may be pronounced very nearly to
fulfil the promise set forth in its title page, of being “as literal as
possible,” still, from the singular inelegance of its style, and the
fact of its being couched in the conversational language of the early
part of the last century, and being unaccompanied by any attempt at
explanation, it may safely be pronounced to be ill adapted to the
requirements of the present age. Indeed, it would not, perhaps, be too
much to assert, that, although the translator may, in his own words,
“have done an acceptable service to such gentlemen as are desirous of
regaining or improving the skill they acquired at school,” he has, in
many instances, burlesqued rather than translated his author. Some of
the curiosities of his version will be found set forth in the notes;
but, for the purpose of the more readily justifying this assertion, a
few of them are adduced: the word “nitidus” is always rendered “neat,”
whether applied to a fish, a cow, a chariot, a laurel, the steps of a
temple, or the art of wrestling. He renders “horridus,” “in a rude
pickle;” “virgo” is generally translated “the young lady;” “vir” is “a
gentleman;” “senex” and “senior” are indifferently “the old blade,” “the
old fellow,” v or “the old gentleman;” while “summa arx” is “the very tip-top.”
“Misera” is “poor soul;” “exsilio” means “to bounce forth;” “pellex” is
“a miss;” “lumina” are “the peepers;” “turbatum fugere” is “to scower
off in a mighty bustle;” “confundor” is “to be jumbled;” and “squalidus”
is “in a sorry pickle.” “Importuna” is “a plaguy baggage;” “adulterium”
is rendered “her pranks;” “ambages” becomes either “a long rabble of
words,” “a long-winded detail,” or “a tale of a tub;” “miserabile
carmen” is “a dismal ditty;” “increpare hos” is “to rattle these
blades;” “penetralia” means “the parlour;” while “accingere,” more
literally than elegantly, is translated “buckle to.” “Situs” is “nasty
stuff;” “oscula jungere” is “to tip him a kiss;” “pingue ingenium” is a
circumlocution for “a blockhead;” “anilia instrumenta” are “his old
woman’s accoutrements;” and “repetito munere Bacchi” is conveyed to the
sense of the reader as, “they return again to their bottle, and take the
other glass.” These are but a specimen of the blemishes which disfigure
the most literal of the English translations of the Metamorphoses. In the year 1656, a little volume was published, by J[ohn]
B[ulloker,] entitled “Ovid’s Metamorphosis, translated grammatically,
and, according to the propriety of our English tongue, so far as grammar
and the verse will bear, written chiefly for the use of schools, to be
used according to the directions in the preface to the painfull
schoolmaster, and more fully in the book called, ‘Ludus Literarius, or
the Grammar school, chap. 8.’” Notwithstanding a title so pretentious,
it contains a translation of no more than the first 567 lines of the
first Book, executed in a fanciful and pedantic manner; and its rarity
is now the only merit of the volume. A literal interlinear
translation of the first Book “on the plan recommended by Mr. Locke,”
was published in 1839, which had been already preceded by “a selection
from the Metamorphoses of Ovid, adapted to the Hamiltonian system, by a
literal and interlineal translation,” published by James Hamilton, the
author of the Hamiltonian system. This work contains selections only
from the first six books, and consequently embraces but a very small
portion of the entire work. For the better elucidation of the different fabulous narratives and
allusions, explanations have been added, which vi are principally derived from the writings of Herodotus, Apollodorus,
Pausanias, Dio Cassius, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Strabo, Hyginus,
Nonnus, and others of the historians, philosophers, and mythologists of
antiquity. A great number of these illustrations are collected in
the elaborate edition of Ovid, published by the Abbé Banier, one of the
most learned scholars of the last century; who has, therein, and in his
“Explanations of the Fables of Antiquity,” with indefatigable labour and
research, culled from the works of ancient authors, all such information
as he considered likely to throw any light upon the Mythology and
history of Greece and Rome. This course has been adopted, because it was considered that a
statement of the opinions of contemporary authors would be the most
likely to enable the reader to form his own ideas upon the various
subjects presented to his notice. Indeed, except in two or three
instances, space has been found too limited to allow of more than an
occasional reference to the opinions of modern scholars. Such being the
object of the explanations, the reader will not be surprised at the
absence of critical and lengthened discussions on many of those moot
points of Mythology and early history which have occupied, with no very
positive result, the attention of Niebuhr, Lobeck, Müller, Buttmann, and
many other scholars of profound learning. vii A SYNOPTICAL VIEW OF THE PRINCIPAL TRANSFORMATIONS MENTIONED IN THE METAMORPHOSES. BOOK I. Chaos is divided by the Deity into
four Elements: to these their respective inhabitants are assigned, and
man is created from earth and water. The four Ages follow, and in the
last of these the Giants aspire to the sovereignty of the heavens; being
slain by Jupiter, a new race of men springs up from their blood. These
becoming noted for their impiety, Jupiter not only transforms Lycaon
into a wolf, but destroys the whole race of men and animals by a Deluge,
with the exception of Deucalion and Pyrrha, who, when the waters have
abated, renew the human race, by throwing stones behind them. Other
animated beings are produced by heat and moisture: and, among them, the
serpent Python. Phœbus slays him, and institutes the Pythian games as a
memorial of the event, in which the conquerors are crowned with beech;
for as yet the laurel does not exist, into which Daphne is changed soon
after, while flying from Phœbus. On this taking place, the other rivers
repair to her father Peneus, either to congratulate or to console him;
but Inachus is not there, as he is grieving for his daughter Io, whom
Jupiter, having first ravished her, has changed into a cow. She is
entrusted by Juno to the care of Argus; Mercury having first related to
him the transformation of the Nymph Syrinx into reeds, slays him, on
which his eyes are placed by Juno in the tail of the peacock. Io, having
recovered human shape, becomes the mother of Epaphus. BOOK II. Epaphus , having accused Phaëton of
falsely asserting that Phœbus is his father, Phaëton requests Phœbus, as
a proof of his affection towards his child, to allow him the guidance of
the viii chariot of the Sun for one day. This being granted, the whole earth is
set on fire by him, and the Æthiopians are turned black by the heat.
Jupiter strikes Phaëton with a thunderbolt, and while his sisters and
his kinsman Cyenus are lamenting him, the former are changed into trees,
and Cyenus into a swan. On visiting the earth, that he may repair the
damage caused by the conflagration, Jupiter sees Calisto, and, assuming
the form of Diana, he debauches her. Juno, being enraged, changes
Calisto into a bear; and her own son Arcas being about to pierce her
with an arrow, Jupiter places them both among the Constellations. Juno
having complained of this to Oceanus, is borne back to the heavens by
her peacocks, who have so lately changed their colour; a thing which has
also happened to the raven, which has been lately changed from white to
black, he having refused to listen to the warnings of the crow (who
relates the story of its own transformation, and of that of Nyctimene
into an owl), and having persisted in informing Phœbus of the intrigues
of Coronis. Her son Æsculapius being cut out of the womb of Coronis and
carried to the cave of Chiron the Centaur, Ocyrrhoë, the daughter of
Chiron, is changed into a mare, while she is prophesying. Her father in
vain invokes the assistance of Apollo, for he, in the guise of a
shepherd, is tending his oxen in the country of Elis. He neglecting his
herd, Mercury takes the opportunity of stealing it; after which he
changes Battus into a touchstone, for betraying him. Flying thence,
Mercury beholds Herse, the daughter of Cecrops, and debauches her. Her
sister Aglauros, being envious of her, is changed into a rock. Mercury
returns to heaven, on which Jupiter orders him to drive the herds of
Agenor towards the shore; and then, assuming the form of a bull, he
carries Europa over the sea to the isle of Crete. BOOK III. Agenor commands his son Cadmus to
seek his sister Europa. While he is doing this, he slays a dragon in
Bœotia; and having sowed its teeth in the earth, men are produced, with
whose assistance he builds the walls of Thebes. His first cause of grief
is the fate of his grandson Actæon, who, being changed into a stag, is
torn to pieces by his own hounds. This, however, gives pleasure to Juno,
who hates not only Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, and the favourite of
Jupiter, but all the house of Agenor as well. Assuming the form of
Beroë, she contrives the destruction of Semele by the lightnings of
Jupiter; while Bacchus, being saved alive from his mother’s womb, is
brought up on the earth. Jupiter has a discussion with Juno on the
relative pleasures of the sexes, and they agree to ix refer the question to Tiresias, who has been of both sexes. He gives his
decision in favour of Jupiter, on which Juno deprives him of sight; and,
by way of recompense, Jupiter bestows on him the gift of prophesy. His
first prediction is fulfilled in the case of Narcissus, who, despising
the advances of all females (in whose number is Echo, who has been
transformed into a sound), at last pines away with love for himself, and
is changed into a flower which bears his name. Pentheus, however,
derides the prophet; who predicts his fate, and his predictions are soon
verified; for, on the celebration of the orgies, Bacchus having assumed
a disguise, is brought before him; and having related to Pentheus the
story of the transformation of the Etrurian sailors into dolphins, he is
thrown into prison. On this, Pentheus is torn in pieces by the
Bacchanals, and great respect is afterwards paid to the rites of
Bacchus. BOOK IV. Still Alcithoë and her sisters,
neglecting the rites, attend to their spinning, during the festivities,
and pass the time in telling stories; and, among others, that of Pyramus
and Thisbe, by whose blood the mulberry is turned from white to black,
and that of the discovery of the intrigues of Mars and Venus, on the
information of the Sun. They also tell how the Sun assumed the form of
Eurynome, that he might enjoy her daughter Leucothoë ; how Clytie, becoming
jealous of her sister, was transformed into a sun-flower; and how
Salmacis and Hermaphroditus had become united into one body. After this,
through the agency of Bacchus, the sisters are transformed into bats,
and their webs are changed into vines. Ino rejoicing at this, Juno, in
her hatred and indignation, sends one of the Furies to her, who causes
her to be struck with insanity, on which she leaps into the sea, with
her son Melicerta in her arms; but by the intercession of Venus, they
become sea Deities, and their Sidonian attendants, who are bewailing
them as dead, are changed into rocks. Cadmus, afflicted at this fresh
calamity, retires from Thebes, and flies to Illyria, together with his
wife, where they are both transformed into serpents. Of those who
despise Bacchus, Acrisius alone remains, the grandfather of Perseus,
who, having cut off the head of the Gorgon Medusa, serpents are produced
by her blood. Perseus turns Atlas into a mountain, and having liberated
Andromeda, he changes sea-weed into coral, and afterwards marries
her. BOOK V. A tumult arising during the
celebration of the nuptials, Phineus claims Andromeda, who has been
betrothed to him; and x together with Prœtus, he and Polydectes are turned into stone. Pallas,
who has aided Perseus, now leaves him, and goes to Helicon, to see the
fountain of Hippocrene. The Muses tell her the story of Pyreneus and the
Pierides, who were transformed into magpies after they had repeated
various songs on the subjects of the transformation of the Deities into
various forms of animals; the rape of Proserpine, the wanderings of
Ceres, the change of Cyane into a fountain, of a boy into a lizard, of
Ascalaphus into an owl, of the Sirens into birds in part, of Arethusa
into a spring, of Lyncus into a lynx, and of the invention of
agriculture by Triptolemus. BOOK VI. Influenced by the example of the
Muses, Pallas determines on the destruction of Arachne. She enters with
her into a contest for the superiority in the art of weaving. Each
represents various transformations on her web, and then Arachne is
changed into a spider. Niobe, however, is not deterred thereby from
preferring her own lot to that of Latona; on account of which, all her
children are slain by Apollo and Diana, and she is changed into a rock.
On learning this, while one person relates the transformation by Latona
of the Lycian rustics into frogs, another calls to mind how Marsyas was
flayed by Apollo. Niobe is lamented by Pelops, whose shoulder is of
ivory. To console the Thebans in their afflictions, ambassadors come
from the adjacent cities. The Athenians alone are absent, as they are
attacked by hordes of barbarians, who are routed by Tereus, who marries
Progne, the daughter of Pandion. Tereus coming a second time to Athens,
takes back with him to his kingdom Philomela, his wife’s sister; and
having committed violence on her, with other enormities, he is
transformed into a hoopoe, while Philomela is changed into a
nightingale, and Progne becomes a swallow. Pandion, hearing of these
wondrous events dies of grief. Erectheus succeeds him, whose daughter,
Orithyia, is ravished by Boreas, and by him is the mother of Calais and
Zethes, who are of the number of the Argonauts on the following
occasion. BOOK VII. Jason , by the aid of Medea, having
conquered the bulls that breathe forth flames, having sowed the teeth of
a serpent, from which armed men are produced, and having lulled the
dragon to sleep, recovers the Golden Fleece. Medea, accompanying Jason
to Greece, restores Æson to youth by the aid of drugs; and promising the
same to Pelias, having first, as a specimen, changed a ram into a lamb,
by stratagem she kills him. Passing through many places made remarkable
by various transformations, and xi having slain her children, she marries Ægeus, when Theseus returns home,
and narrowly escapes being poisoned by her magic potions. Minos
interrupts the joy of Ægeus on the return of his son, and wages war
against him; having collected troops from all parts, even from Paros,
where Arne has been changed into a jackdaw. Minos endeavours to gain the
alliance of Æacus, who, however, refuses it, and sends the Myrmidons,
(who have been changed into ants from men after a severe pestilence),
under the command of Cephalus to assist Ægeus. Cephalus relates to
Phocus, the son of Æacus, how, being carried off by Aurora and assuming
another shape, he had induced his wife Procris to prove faithless; and
how he had received from her a dog and a javelin, the former of which,
together with a fox, was changed into stone; while the latter, by
inadvertence, caused the death of his wife. Introduction by Stephen Brooks, Jr., from 1899 McKay edition: v INTRODUCTION. P. Ovidius Naso —commonly known
as Ovid—was born at Sulmo, about , ninety miles from Rome, in the year
43 B.C. His father belonged to an old equestrian family, and at an
early age brought his son to Rome, where he was educated under the most
distinguished masters. Very little is known of the poetís life, except
that which is gathered from his own writings. After finishing his
education at home he visited Athens, in company with the poet Macer, for
the purpose of completing his studies, and before returning visited the
magnificent cities of Asia Minor and spent nearly a year in Sicily. Although as a young man Ovid showed a natural taste and inclination
for poetical composition, he was by no means encouraged to indulge in
this pursuit. His father thought that the profession of law was much
more apt to lead to distinction and political eminence than the vocation
of a poet. He therefore dissuaded his son from writing poetry and urged
him to devote himself to the legal profession. Compliance with his
father’s wishes led him to spend much time in the forum, and for a while
poetry was abandoned. Upon attaining his majority, vi he held several minor offices of state; but neither his health nor his
inclinations would permit him to perform the duties of public life.
Poetry was his love, and in spite of the strong objections of his
father, he resolved to abandon the law courts and devote himself to a
more congenial occupation. He sought the society of the most
distinguished poets of the day, and his admiration for them amounted
almost to reverence. He numbered among his intimate friends the poets
Macer, Propertius, Ponticus and Bassus, while Æmilius Macer, Virgil’s
contemporary, used to read his compositions to him, and even the
fastidious Horace, it is said, occasionally delighted the young man’s
ear with the charm of his verse. Ovid was married three times. His first wife he married when little
more than a boy, and the union does not seem to have been a happy one,
though it was probably due to no fault of the wife. His second wife
seems also to have been of blameless character, but his love for her was
of short duration. His third wife was a lady of the great Fabian house
and a friend of the Empress Livia. She appears to have been a woman in
every way worthy of the great and lasting love which the poet lavished
upon her to the day of his death. Up to the age of fifty Ovid had lived a life of prosperity and
happiness. Though not a wealthy man, his means were such as to permit
him to indulge in the luxuries of refined life, and his attainments as vii a poet had surrounded him with a circle of most desirable friends and
admirers. He had even obtained the favor and patronage of the royal
family. About the year 8 A.D. he, however, incurred the great
displeasure of Augustus, and was ordered by him to withdraw from Rome
and dwell in the colony of Tomi, on the shore of the Euxine sea. Leaving
behind him a wife to whom he was devotedly attached he obeyed the edict
of his emperor and entered upon an exile from which he was destined
never to return. He died in banishment at Tomi in the year 18 A.D. The exact reason for Ovid’s banishment has never been clear, though
there have been many conjectures as to the cause. About two years
previous to his exile Ovid had published a composition which had greatly
displeased Augustus, on account of its immoral tendency. Almost
coincident with this publication was the discovery of the scandal
relating to Julia, daughter of the emperor. It is probable that the
proximity of these two events tended to intensify the imperial
displeasure, and when some time later there was made public the intrigue
of the emperor’s granddaughter, the indignation of Augustus gave itself
vent in the banishment of Ovid. The writings of Ovid consist of the Amores in three books; the Heroic Epistles , twenty-one in number; the Ars Amatoria ;
the Remedia Amoris ; the Metamorphoses , in fifteen books;
the Fasti , in viii six books; the Tristia , in five books; the Epistles , in
four books, and a few minor poems. In the following pages will be found
a translation of the Metamorphoses . Final page of 1899 McKay edition: The Hamilton, Locke Clark SERIES OF Interlinear Translations Have long been the Standard and are now the Best Translated and Most Complete Series of Interlinears published. 12mo., well bound in Half Leather. Price reduced to $1.50 each.   Postpaid to any
address. Latin Interlinear Translations: VIRGIL —By Hart and Osborne . CÆSAR —By Hamilton and Clark . HORACE —By Stirling, Nuttall and Clark . CICERO —By Hamilton and Clark . SALLUST —By Hamilton and Clark . OVID —By George W. Heilig . JUVENAL —By Hamilton and Clark . LIVY —By Hamilton and Clark . CORNELIUS NEPOS — By Hamilton and Underwood . Greek Interlinear Translations: HOMER’S ILIAD —By Thomas Clark . XENOPHON’S ANABASIS —By Hamilton and Clark . GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN —By George W. Heilig . S. Austin Allibone, the distinguished author, writes: “There is a growing disapprobation, both in Great Britain and America,
of the disproportionate length of time devoted by the youthful student
to the acquisition of the dead languages; and therefore nothing will
tend so effectually to the preservation of the Greek and Latin grammars
as their judicious union (the fruit of an intelligent compromise) with
the Interlinear Classics.” DAVID McKAY, Publisher, Philadelphia, Formerly published by Charles De Silver & Sons. THE METAMORPHOSES Books I-III. Fable descriptions are taken from the translator’s
Synopses. Introduction Book I The Argument Fable I : God reduces Chaos into order. Fable II : God gives form and regularity
to the universe. Fable III : The Golden Age. Fable IV : The Silver Age. The Brazen Age.
The Iron Age. Fable V : The Giants. Fable VI : Jupiter determines to destroy
the world. Fable VII : Lycaon changes into a
wolf. Fable VIII : Jupiter resolves to
extirpate mankind by a universal deluge. Fable IX : Neptune appeases the angry
waves. Deucalion and Pyrrha are the only persons saved from the
deluge. Fable X : Deucalion and Pyrrha re-people
the earth. Fable XI : Apollo institutes the Pythian
games. Fable XII : Apollo and Daphne. Fable XIII : Jupiter and Io. Fable XIV : Jupiter changes Io into a
cow; the watchful Argus. Fable XV : Pan and Syrinx. Fable XVI : Juno places Argus’s eyes in
the peacock’s tail. Fable XVII : Io stops in Egypt, under
the name of Isis. Book II Fable I : Phaëton guides Apollo’s
chariot. Fable II : Phaëton falls into the river
Eridanus. Fable III : The sisters of Phaëton. Fable IV : Cycnus is transformed into a
swan. Fable V : Jupiter and Calisto. Fables VI and VII : Calisto is
transformed into a Bear. Calisto and Arcas become the Great and the
Little Bear. The raven is changed from white to black. Fable VIII : Ericthonius enclosed in a
basket. Fable IX : Nyctimene transformed into an
owl. Fable X : Ocyrrhoë, the daughter of
Chiron, transformed into a mare. Fable XI : Mercury steals the oxen of
Apollo. Fable XII : Mercury and Herse. Fable XIII : Aglauros and Envy. Fable XIV : Jupiter and Europa. Book III Fable I : Cadmus founds Bœotia. Fable II : Cadmus and the dragon’s
teeth. Cadmus founds Thebes. Fable III : Actæon transformed into a
stag. Fable IV : Jupiter and Semele. Fable V : Birth of Bacchus. Tiresias
decides a dispute between Jupiter and Juno. Fable VI : Echo and Narcissus. Fable VII : Narcissus changed into a
flower. Fable VIII : Pentheus is torn to
pieces by the Bacchantes. 9 1 BOOK THE FIRST. THE ARGUMENT. My design leads me to speak of forms
changed into new bodies. 1 Ye Gods, (for you it was who changed them,)
favor my attempts, 2 and bring down the lengthened narrative from the very
beginning of the world, even to my own times. 3 FABLE I. God reduces Chaos into order. He
separates the four elements, and disposes the several bodies, of which
the universe is formed, into their proper situations. At first, the sea, the earth, and
the heaven, which covers all things, were the only face of nature
throughout 10 I. 6-26 the whole universe, 2 I. 6-26 which men have named Chaos; a rude and undigested mass, 4 and nothing more than an inert weight, and the discordant atoms of things not
harmonizing, heaped together in the same spot. No Sun 5 as yet gave light
to the world; nor did the Moon, 6 by increasing, recover her horns anew.
The Earth did not as yet hang in the surrounding air, balanced by
its own weight, nor had Amphitrite 7 stretched out her arms along the
lengthened margin of the coasts. Wherever, too, was the land, there also
was the sea and the air; and thus was the earth without firmness,
the sea unnavigable, the air void of light; in no one of them did
its present form exist. And one was ever obstructing the
other; because in the same body the cold was striving with the hot, the
moist with the dry, the soft with the hard, things having weight with those devoid of weight. To this discord God and bounteous Nature 8 put an end; for he
separated the earth from the heavens, and the waters from the earth, and
distinguished the clear 11 I. 26-31 heavens from the gross atmosphere. And after he had unravelled these elements , and released them from that confused heap, he
combined them, thus disjoined, in harmonious unison, each in its proper place. The 3 I. 26-31 element of the vaulted heaven, 9 fiery and without weight, shone forth,
and selected a place for itself in the highest region; next after it, both in lightness and in place, was the air; the Earth was more
weighty than these, and drew with it the more ponderous atoms,
and was pressed together by its own gravity. The encircling waters sank
to the lowermost place, 10 and surrounded the solid globe. EXPLANATION. The ancient philosophers, unable to comprehend how something could be
produced out of nothing, supposed a matter pre-existent to the Earth in
its present shape, which afterwards received form and order from some
powerful cause. According to them, God was not the Creator, but the
Architect of the universe, in ranging and disposing the elements in
situations most suitable to their respective qualities. This is the
Chaos so often sung of by the poets, and which Hesiod was the first to
mention. It is clear that this system was but a confused and disfigured tradition
of the creation of the world, as mentioned by Moses; and thus, beneath
these fictions, there lies some faint glimmering of truth. The first two
chapters of the book of Genesis will be found to throw considerable
light on the foundation of this Mythological system of the world’s
formation. Hesiod, the most ancient of the heathen writers who have enlarged upon
this subject, seems to have derived much of his information 12 I. 32-40 from the works of Sanchoniatho, who is supposed to have borrowed his
ideas concerning Chaos from that passage in the second verse of the
first Chapter of Genesis, which mentions the darkness that was spread
over the whole universe—‘and darkness was upon the face of the
deep’—for he expresses himself almost in those words. Sanchoniatho
lived before the Trojan war, and professed to have received his
information respecting the original construction of the world from a
priest of ‘Jehovah,’ named Jerombaal. He wrote in the Phœnician
language; but we have only a translation of his works, 4 I. 32-43 by Philo Judæus, which is by many supposed to be spurious. It is,
however, very probable, that from him the Greeks borrowed their notions
regarding Chaos, which they mingled with fables of their own
invention. FABLE II. After the separation of matter, God
gives form and regularity to the universe; and all other living
creatures being produced, Prometheus moulds earth tempered with water,
into a human form, which is animated by Minerva. When thus he, whoever of the Gods he
was, 11 had divided the mass so separated, and reduced
it, so divided, into distinct members; in the first place, that
it might not be unequal on any side, he gathered it up into the form of
a vast globe; then he commanded the sea to be poured around it, and to
grow boisterous with the raging winds, and to surround the shores of the
Earth, encompassed by it ; he added also springs, and numerous
pools and lakes, and he bounded the rivers as they flowed downwards,
with slanting banks. These, different in different places, are
some of them swallowed up 12 by the Earth itself; some of
them reach the ocean, 13 I. 40-49 and, received in the expanse of waters that take a freer range, beat
against shores instead of banks. He commanded the plains, 13 too, to be extended, the valleys 5 I. 43-49 to sink down, the woods to be clothed with green leaves, the craggy
mountains to arise; and, as on the right-hand side, 14 two Zones intersect
the heavens, and as many on the left; and as there is a fifth
hotter than these, so did the care of the Deity distinguish this
enclosed mass of the Earth by the same number, and as many
climates are marked out upon the Earth. Of these, that which is the
middle one 15 is not habitable 14 I. 49-60 on account 6 I. 49-61 of the heat; deep snow covers two 16 of them . Between either these
he placed as many more, 17 and gave them a temperate climate, heat being
mingled with cold. Over these hangs the air, which is heavier than fire, in the same
degree that the weight of water is lighter than the weight of the earth.
Here he ordered vapors, here too, the clouds to take their station; the
thunder, too, to terrify the minds of mortals, and with the lightnings,
the winds that bring on cold. The Contriver of the World did not allow
these indiscriminately to take possession of the sky. Even now,
(although they each of them govern their own blasts in a distinct tract)
they are with great difficulty prevented from rending the world asunder,
so great is the discord of the brothers. 18 15 I. 61-73 Eurus took his way 19 towards the rising of Aurora and the realms
of Nabath 20 and 7 I. 61-76 Persia, and the mountain ridges exposed to the rays of the morning. The
Evening star, and the shores which are warm with the setting sun, are
bordering upon Zephyrus. 21 The terrible Boreas invaded Scythia, 22 and the
regions of the North. The opposite quarter is wet with continual clouds,
and the drizzling South Wind. 23 Over these he placed the firmament,
clear and devoid of gravity, and not containing anything of the dregs of
earth. Scarcely had he separated all these by fixed limits, when the stars,
which had long lain hid, concealed beneath 16 I. 73-88 that mass of Chaos , began to glow through the range of the
heavens. And that no region might be destitute of its own peculiar animated beings, the stars and the forms of the Gods 24 possess the tract of heaven; the waters fell to be inhabited by the
smooth fishes; 25 the Earth received the wild beasts, and the
yielding air the birds. But an animated being, more holy than these, more fitted to 8 I. 76-88 receive higher faculties, and which could rule over the rest, 26 was
still wanting. Then Man was formed. Whether it was that the
Artificer of all things, the original of the world in its improved
state, framed him from divine elements; 27 or whether, the Earth, being
newly made, and but lately divided from the lofty æther, still retained
some atoms of its kindred heaven, which, tempered with the waters of the
stream, the son of Iapetus fashioned after the image of the Gods, who
rule over all things. And, whereas other animals bend their looks
downwards upon the Earth, to Man he gave a countenance to look on high
and to behold the heavens, and to raise his face erect to the stars.
Thus, that which had been lately rude earth, and without any 17 I. 89-97 regular shape, being changed, assumed the form of Man, till then unknown. EXPLANATION. According to Ovid, as in the book of Genesis, man is the last work of
the Creator. The information derived from Holy Writ is here presented to
us, in a disfigured form. Prometheus, who tempers the earth, and
Minerva, who animates his workmanship, is God, who formed man, and
‘breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.’ Some writers have labored to prove that this Prometheus, of the heathen
Mythology, was a Scriptural character. Bochart believes him to have been
the same with Magog, mentioned in the book of Genesis. Prometheus was
the son of Iapetus, and Magog was the son of Japhet, who, according to
that learned writer, was identical with Iapetus. He says, that as Magog
went to settle in Scythia, so did Prometheus; as Magog either invented,
or improved, the art of founding metals, and forging iron, so, according
to the heathen poets, did Prometheus. Diodorus Siculus asserts that
Prometheus was the first to teach mankind how to produce fire from the
flint and steel. The fable of Prometheus being devoured by an eagle, according to some,
is founded on the name of Magog, which signifies ‘a man devoured by 9 I. 89-105 sorrow.’ Le Clerc, in his notes on Hesiod, says, that Epimetheus,
the brother of Prometheus, was the same with the Gog of Scripture, the
brother of Magog. Some writers, again, have exerted their ingenuity to
prove that Prometheus is identical with the patriarch Noah. FABLE III. The formation of man is followed by a
succession of the four ages of the world. The first is the Golden Age,
during which Innocence and Justice alone govern the world. The Golden Age was first founded,
which, without any avenger, of its own accord, without laws, practised
both faith and rectitude. Punishment, and the fear of it , did not
exist, and threatening decrees were not read upon the brazen tables , 28 fixed up to view , nor yet did the
suppliant multitude dread the countenance of its judge; but all were in safety without any avenger. The pine-tree, cut from its native mountains, had not 18 I. 98-105 yet descended to the flowing waves, that it might visit a foreign
region; and mortals were acquainted with no shores beyond their own. Not
as yet did deep ditches surround the towns; no trumpets of straightened,
or clarions of crooked brass, 29 no helmets, no swords then existed. Without occasion for soldiers, the minds of men , free
from care, enjoyed an easy tranquillity. The Earth itself, too, in freedom, untouched by the harrow, and
wounded by no ploughshares, of its own accord produced everything; and
men, contented with the food created under no compulsion, gathered the
fruit of the arbute-tree, and the strawberries of the mountain, and
cornels, and blackberries 10 I. 105-124 adhering to the prickly bramble-bushes, and acorns which had fallen from
the wide-spreading tree of Jove. Then it was an eternal spring;
and the gentle Zephyrs, with their soothing breezes, cherished the
flowers produced without any seed. Soon, too, the Earth unploughed
yielded crops of grain, and the land, without being renewed, was
whitened with the heavy ears of corn. Then, rivers of milk, then, rivers
of nectar were flowing, and the yellow honey was distilled from the
green holm oak. EXPLANATION. The heathen poets had learned, most probably from tradition, that our
first parents lived for some time in peaceful innocence; that, without
tillage, the garden of Eden furnished them with fruit and food in
abundance; and that the animals were submissive to their commands: that
after the fall the ground became unfruitful, and yielded nothing without labor;
and that nature no longer spontaneously acknowledged man for its master.
The more happy days of our first parents they seem to have styled the
Golden Age, each writer being desirous to make his own country the scene
of those times of innocence. The Latin writers, for instance, have
placed in Italy, and under the reign of Saturn and Janus, events, which,
as they really happened , the Scriptures relate in the histories of Adam
and of Noah. 19 I. 105-134 FABLE IV. In the Silver Age, men begin not to be
so just, nor, consequently, so happy, as in the Golden Age. In the
Brazen Age, which succeeds, they become yet less virtuous; but their
wickedness does not rise to its highest pitch until the Iron Age, when
it makes its appearance in all its deformity. Afterwards (Saturn being driven into
the shady realms of Tartarus), the world was under the sway of Jupiter; then the Silver Age succeeded, inferior to that of gold,
but more precious than that of yellow brass. Jupiter shortened
the duration of the former spring, and divided the year into four
periods by means of winters, and summers, and unsteady autumns, and
short springs. Then, for the first time, did the parched air glow with
sultry heat, and the ice, bound up by the winds, was pendant. Then, for
the first time, did men enter houses; those houses were caverns,
and thick shrubs, and twigs fastened together with bark. Then, for the
first time, were the seeds of Ceres buried in long furrows, and the oxen
groaned, pressed by the yoke of the ploughshare . 11 I. 124-148 The Age of Brass succeeded, as the third in order, after
these; fiercer in disposition, and more prone to horrible warfare, but
yet free from impiety. The last Age was of hard iron. Immediately
every species of crime burst forth, in this age of degenerated
tendencies; 30 modesty, truth, and honor took flight; in their place
succeeded fraud, deceit, treachery, violence, and the cursed hankering
for acquisition. The sailor now spread his sails to the winds, and with
these, as yet, he was but little acquainted; and the trees , which
had long stood on the lofty mountains, now, as ships bounded 31 through the unknown waves. The ground, 20 I. 134-150 too, hitherto common as the light of the sun and the breezes, the
cautious measurer marked out with his lengthened boundary. And not only was the rich soil required to furnish corn and due
sustenance, but men even descended into the entrails of the Earth; and
riches were dug up, the incentives to vice, which the Earth had hidden,
and had removed to the Stygian shades. 32 Then destructive iron came
forth, and gold, more destructive than iron; then War came forth, that
fights through the means of both, 33 and that brandishes in his
blood-stained hands the clattering arms. Men live by rapine; the guest
is not safe from his entertainer, nor the father-in-law from the
son-in-law; good feeling, too, between brothers is a rarity. The husband
is eager for the death of the wife, she for that of her husband.
Horrible stepmothers then mingle the ghastly wolfsbane; the son
prematurely makes inquiry 34 12 I. 148-156 into the years of his father. Piety lies vanquished, and the virgin
Astræa 35 is the last of the heavenly Deities to abandon
the Earth, now drenched in slaughter. EXPLANATION. The Poet here informs us, that during the Golden Age, a perpetual
spring reigned on the earth, and that the division of the year into
seasons was not known until the Silver Age. This allusion to Eden is
very generally to be found in the works of the 21 I. 150-156 heathen poets. The Silver Age is succeeded by the Brazen, and that is
followed by the Iron Age, which still continues. The meaning is, that
man gradually degenerated from his primeval innocence, and arrived at
that state of wickedness and impiety, of which the history of all ages,
ancient and modern, presents us with so many lamentable examples. The limited nature of their views, and the fact that their exuberant
fancy was the source from which they derived many of their alleged
events, naturally betrayed the ancient writers into great
inconsistencies. For in the Golden Age of Saturn, we find wars waged,
and crimes committed. Saturn expelled his father, and seized his throne;
Jupiter, his son, treated Saturn as he had done his father Uranus; and
Jupiter, in his turn, had to wage war against the Giants, in their
attempt to dispossess him of the heavens. FABLE V. The Giants having attempted to render
themselves masters of heaven, Jupiter buries them under the mountains
which they have heaped together to facilitate their assault; and the
Earth, animating their blood, forms out of it a cruel and fierce
generation of men. And that the lofty realms of æther might not be more safe than the Earth, they say that the Giants
aspired to the sovereignty of Heaven, and piled the mountains, heaped
together, even to the lofty stars. Then the omnipotent Father, hurling
his lightnings, broke through Olympus, 36 and struck Ossa away from
Pelion, that lay beneath it. While the dreadful 13 I. 156-170 carcasses lay overwhelmed beneath their own structure, they say that the
Earth was wet, drenched with the plenteous blood of her sons, and that
she gave life to the warm gore; and that, lest no memorial of this
ruthless race should be surviving, she shaped them into the form of men.
But that generation, too, was a despiser of the Gods above, and most
greedy of ruthless slaughter, and full of violence: you might see that
they derived their origin from blood. 22 I. 156-172 EXPLANATION. The war of the giants, which is here mentioned, is not to be confounded
with that between Jupiter and the Titans, who were inhabitants of
heaven. The fall of the angels, as conveyed by tradition, probably gave
rise to the story of the Titans; while, perhaps, the building of the
tower of Babel may have laid the foundation of that of the attempt by
the giants to reach heaven. Perhaps, too, the descendants of Cain, who
are probably the persons mentioned in Scripture as the children ‘of men’
and ‘giants,’ were the race depicted under the form of the Giants, and
the generation that sprung from their blood. See Genesis, ch. vi.
ver. 2, 4. FABLE VI. Jupiter , having seen the crimes of this
impious race of men, calls a council of the Gods, and determines to
destroy the world. When the Father of the Gods ,
the son of Saturn, beheld this from his loftiest height, he groaned
aloud; and recalling to memory the polluted banquet on the table of
Lycaon, not yet publicly known, from the crime being but lately
committed, he conceives in his mind vast wrath, and such as is worthy of
Jove, and calls together a council; no delay detains them, thus
summoned. There is a way on high, 37 easily seen in a clear sky, and
which, remarkable for its very whiteness, receives the name of the Milky Way . Along this is the way for the Gods above to 14 I. 170-193 the abode of the great Thunderer and his royal palace. On the right and
on the left side the courts of the ennobled Deities 38 are thronged, with 23 I. 172-193 open gates. The Gods of lower rank 39 inhabit various
places; in front of the Way , the powerful and illustrious
inhabitants of Heaven have established their residence. This is the
place which, if boldness may be allowed to my expression, I should
not hesitate to style the palatial residence of Heaven. When, therefore,
the Gods above had taken their seats in the marble hall of assembly; he
himself, elevated on his seat, and leaning on his sceptre of ivory,
three or four times shook the awful locks 40 of his head, with
which he makes the Earth, the Seas, and the Stars to tremble. Then,
after such manner as this, did he open his indignant lips:— “Not even at that time was I more concerned for the empire of
the universe, when each of the snake-footed monsters was endeavoring to
lay his hundred arms on the captured skies. For although that was a
dangerous enemy, yet that war was with but one stock, and sprang from a
single origin. Now must the race of mortals be cut off by me, wherever
Nereus 41 roars on all sides of the earth; this I swear
by the Rivers of Hell, that glide in the Stygian grove beneath the
earth. All methods have been already tried; but a wound that admits of
no cure, must be cut away with the knife, that the sound parts may not
be corrupted. I have as subjects , Demigods, and I have the
rustic Deities, the Nymphs, 42 24 I. 193-215 and the Fauns, and the Satyrs, and the Sylvans, the inhabitants of 15 I. 193-215 the mountains; these, though as yet, we have not thought them worthy of
the honor of Heaven, let us, at least, permit to inhabit the earth which
we have granted them. And do you, ye Gods of Heaven, believe that they
will be in proper safety, when Lycaon remarkable for his cruelty, has
formed a plot against even me, who own and hold sway over the
thunder and yourselves?” All shouted their assent aloud, and with ardent zeal they called for
vengeance on one who dared such crimes . Thus, when an impious
band 43 madly raged to extinguish the Roman name in
the blood of Cæsar, the human race was astonished with sudden terror at
ruin so universal, and the whole earth shook with horror. Nor was the
affectionate regard, Augustus, of thy subjects less grateful to thee,
than that was to Jupiter. Who, after he had, by means of his voice and
his hand, suppressed their murmurs, all of them kept silence. Soon as
the clamor had ceased, checked by the authority of their ruler, Jupiter
again broke silence in these words: “He, indeed, (dismiss your cares) has suffered dire punishment; but what was the offence and what the retribution,
I will inform you. The report of the iniquity of the age had
reached my ears; wishing to find this not to be the truth,
I descended from the top of Olympus, and, a God in a human
shape, I surveyed the earth. ’Twere an endless task to enumerate
how great an amount of guilt was everywhere discovered; the report
itself was below the truth.” 25 I. 216-226 EXPLANATION. It is to be presumed, that Ovid here follows the prevailing tradition of
his time; and it is surprising how closely that tradition adheres to the
words 16 I. 216-228 of Scripture, relative to the determination of the Almighty to punish
the earth by a deluge, as disclosed in the sixth chapter of Genesis. The
Poet tells us, that the King of heaven calls the Gods to a grand
council, to deliberate upon the punishment of mankind, in retribution
for their wickedness. The words of Scripture are, “And God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of
the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And it repented the
Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.
And the Lord said, ‘I will destroy man, whom I have created from the
face of the earth; both man and beast, and the creeping thing, and the
fowls of the air: for it repenteth me that I have made them .’” —Genesis,
ch. vi. ver. 5, 6, 7. Tradition seems to have faithfully carried down the fact, that, amid
this universal corruption, there was still at least one just man, and
here it attributes to Deucalion the merit that belonged to Noah. FABLE VII. Lycaon , king of Arcadia, in order to
discover if it is Jupiter himself who has come to lodge in his palace,
orders the body of an hostage, who had been sent to him, to be dressed
and served up at a feast. The God, as a punishment, changes him into a
wolf. I had now passed Mænalus, to
be dreaded for its dens of beasts of prey, and the pine-groves of cold
Lycæus, together with Cyllene. 44 After this, I entered the
realms and the inhospitable abode of the Arcadian tyrant, just as the
late twilight was bringing on the night. I gave a signal that a God
had come, and the people commenced to pay their adorations. In the first
place, Lycaon derided their pious supplications. Afterwards, he said,
I will make trial, by a plain proof, whether this is a God, or
whether he is a mortal; nor shall the truth remain a matter of doubt. He
then makes preparations to destroy me, when sunk in sleep, by an
unexpected death; this mode of testing the truth pleases him. And not
content with that, with the 26 I. 226-243 sword he cuts the throat of an hostage that had been sent from the
nation of the Molossians, 45 and 17 I. 228-243 then softens part of the quivering limbs, in boiling water, and part he
roasts with fire placed beneath. Soon as he had placed these on the
table, I, with avenging flames, overthrew the house upon the
household Gods, 46 worthy of their master. Alarmed, he himself takes to
flight, and having reached the solitude of the country, he howls aloud,
and in vain attempts to speak; his mouth gathers rage from himself, and
through its usual desire for slaughter, it is directed against
the sheep, and even still delights in blood. His garments are changed
into hair, his arms into legs; he becomes a wolf, and he still retains
vestiges of his ancient form. His hoariness is still the same, the same
violence appears in his features; his eyes are bright as before; he is still the same image of ferocity. “Thus fell one house; but one house alone did not deserve to perish;
wherever the earth extends, the savage Erinnys 47 reigns. You would
suppose that men had conspired to be wicked; let all men speedily feel
that vengeance which they deserve to endure, for such is my
determination.” EXPLANATION. If Ovid is not here committing an anachronism, and making Jupiter,
before the deluge, relate the story of a historical personage, 27 I. 244-255 who existed long after it, the origin of the story of Lycaon must be
sought in the antediluvian narrative. It is just possible that the
guilty Cain may have been the original of Lycaon. The names are not very
dissimilar: they are each mentioned as the first murderer; and the fact,
that Cain murdered Abel at the moment when he was offering sacrifice to
the Almighty, may have given rise to the tradition that Lycaon had set
human flesh before the king of heaven. The Scripture, too, tells us,
that Cain was personally called to account by the Almighty for his deed
of blood. The punishment here inflicted on Lycaon was not very dissimilar to that 18 I. 244-257 with which Cain was visited. Cain was sentenced to be a fugitive and a
wanderer on the face of the earth; and such is essentially the character
of the wolf, shunned by both men and animals. Of course, there are many
points to which it is not possible to extend the parallel. Some of the
ancient writers tell us, that there were two Lycaons, the first of whom
was the son of Phoroneus, who reigned in Arcadia about the time of the
patriarch Jacob; and the second, who succeeded him, polluted the
festivals of the Gods by the sacrifice of the human race; for, having
erected an altar to Jupiter, at the city of Lycosura, he slew human
victims on it, whence arose the story related by the Poet. This solution
is given by Pausanias, in his Arcadica. We are also told by that
historian, and by Suidas, that Lycaon was, notwithstanding,
a virtuous prince, the benefactor of his people, and the promoter
of improvement. FABLE VIII. Jupiter , not thinking the punishment of
Lycaon sufficient to strike terror into the rest of mankind, resolves,
on account of the universal corruption, to extirpate them by a universal
deluge. Some , by their words approve the
speech of Jupiter, and give spur to him, indignantly exclaiming;
others, by silent assent fulfil their parts. Yet the entire destruction of the human race is a cause of grief to them
all, and they inquire what is to be the form of the earth in future,
when destitute of mankind? who is to place frankincense 48 on the altars?
and whether it is his design to give up the nations for a prey to the
wild beasts? The ruler of the Gods forbids them making these enquiries,
to be alarmed (for that the rest should 28 I. 255-271 be his care); and he promises, that from a wondrous source he
will raise a generation unlike the preceding race. And now he was about to scatter his thunder over all lands; but he
was afraid lest, perchance, the sacred æther might catch fire, from so
many flames, and the extended sky might become inflamed. He remembers,
too, that it was in the decrees of Fate, that a time should
come, 49 at which the sea, the earth, 19 I. 257-283 and the palace of heaven, seized by the flames , should be burned,
and the laboriously-wrought fabric of the universe should be in danger
of perishing. The weapons forged by the hands of the Cyclops are laid
aside; a different mode of punishment pleases him: to
destroy mankind beneath the waves, and to let loose the rains from the
whole tract of Heaven. At once he shuts the North Wind in the caverns of
Æolus, and all those blasts which dispel the clouds drawn over the Earth ; and then he sends forth the South Wind. With
soaking wings the South Wind flies abroad, having his terrible face
covered with pitchy darkness; his beard is loaded with showers,
the water streams down from his hoary locks, clouds gather upon his
forehead, his wings and the folds of his robe 50 drip with wet; and,
as with his broad hand he squeezes the hanging clouds, a crash
arises, and thence showers are poured in torrents from the sky. Iris, 51 the messenger of Juno, clothed in various colors, collects 29 I. 271-301 the waters, and bears a supply upwards to the clouds. The standing corn is beaten down, and the expectations of the
husbandman, now lamented by him, are ruined, and the labors of a
long year prematurely perish. Nor is the wrath of Jove satisfied with
his own heaven; but Neptune , his azure brother, aids him with his
auxiliary waves. He calls together the rivers, which, soon as they had
entered the abode of their ruler, he says, “I must not now employ a
lengthened exhortation; pour forth all your might, so the
occasion requires. Open your abodes, and, each obstacle removed,
give full rein to your streams.” Thus he commanded; they return,
and open the mouths of their fountains, 52 and roll on into the ocean with
unobstructed course. He himself struck 20 I. 283-312 the Earth with his trident, on which it shook, and with a tremor
laid open the sources of its waters. The rivers, breaking out, rush
through the open plains, and bear away, together with the standing corn,
the groves, flocks, men, houses, and temples, together with their sacred utensils . If any house remained, and, not thrown down, was able
to resist ruin so vast, yet the waves, rising aloft, covered the
roof of that house , and the towers tottered, overwhelmed beneath
the stream. And now sea and land had no mark of distinction; everything
now was ocean; and to that ocean shores were wanting. One man takes
possession of a hill, another sits in a curved boat, and plies the oars
there where he had lately ploughed; another sails over the standing
corn, or the roof of his country-house under water; another catches a
fish on the top of an elm-tree. An anchor (if chance so directs) is
fastened in a green meadow, or the curving keels come in contact with
the vineyards, now below them; and where of late the slender
goats had cropped the grass, there unsightly sea-calves are now reposing
their bodies. The Nereids wonder at the groves, the cities, and the 30 I. 301-312 houses under water; dolphins get into the woods, and run against the
lofty branches, and beat against the tossed oaks. The wolf swims 53 among
the sheep; the wave carries along the tawny lions; the wave carries
along the tigers. Neither does the powers of his lightning-shock avail
the wild boar, nor his swift legs the stag, now borne away. The
wandering bird, too, having long sought for land, where it may be
allowed to light, its wings failing, falls down into the sea. The
boundless range of the sea had overwhelmed the hills, and the stranger
waves beat against the heights of the mountains. The greatest part is
carried off by the water: those whom the water spares, long fastings
overcome, through scantiness of food. EXPLANATION. Pausanias makes mention of five deluges. The two most celebrated
happened in the time of Ogyges, and in that of Deucalion. Of the last 21 I. 313-321 Ovid here speaks; and though that deluge was generally said to have
overflowed Thessaly only, he has evidently adopted in his narrative the
tradition of the universal deluge, which all nations seem to have
preserved. He says, that the sea joined its waters to those falling from heaven.
The words of Scripture are (Genesis, vii. 11), ‘All the fountains of the
great deep were broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.’ In
speaking of the top of Parnassus alone being left uncovered, the tradition here
followed by Ovid probably referred to Mount Ararat, where Noah’s ark
rested. Noah and his family are represented by Deucalion and Pyrrha.
Both Noah and Deucalion were saved for their virtuous conduct; when Noah
went out of the ark, he offered solemn sacrifices to God; and Pausanias
tells us that Deucalion, when saved, raised an altar to Jupiter the
Liberator. The Poet tells us, that Deucalion’s deluge was to be the
last: God promised the same thing to Noah. Josephus, in his Antiquities,
Book i., tells us, that the history of the universal deluge was written
by Nicolas of Damascus, Berosus, Mnaseas, and other ancient writers,
from whom the Greeks and Romans received it. 31 I. 313-328 FABLE IX. Neptune appeases the angry waves; and
he commands Triton to sound his shell, that the sea may retire within
its shores, and the rivers within their banks. Deucalion and Pyrrha are
the only persons saved from the deluge. Phocis separates the Aonian 54 from
the Actæan region; a fruitful land while it was a land; but at that
time it had become a part of the sea, and a wide plain of sudden
waters. There a lofty mountain rises towards the stars, with two tops,
by name Parnassus, 55 and advances beyond the clouds with its summit.
When here Deucalion (for the sea had covered all other places), borne in
a little ship, with the partner of his couch, first rested; they
adored the Corycian Nymphs, 56 and the Deities of the mountain, and
the prophetic Themis, 57 22 I. 321-337 who at that time used to give out oracular responses. No man was there
more upright than he, nor a greater lover of justice, nor was any woman
more regardful of the Deities than she. Soon as Jupiter beholds the world overflowed by liquid waters,
and sees that but one man remains out of so many thousands of late, and
sees that but one woman remains out of so many thousands of late, both
guiltless, and both worshippers of the Gods, he disperses the clouds;
and the showers being removed by the North 32 I. 329-342 Wind, he both lays open the earth to the heavens, and the heavens to the
earth. The rage, too, of the sea does not continue; and his three-forked
trident now laid aside, the ruler of the deep assuages the
waters, and calls upon the azure Triton standing above the deep, and
having his shoulders covered with the native purple shells; 58 and he
bids him blow 59 his resounding trumpet, and, the signal being given,
to call back the waves and the streams. The hollow-wreathed trumpet 60 is taken up by him, which grows to a great width from its lowest
twist; the trumpet, which, soon 23 I. 337-365 as it receives the air in the middle of the sea, fills with its notes
the shores lying under either sun. Then, too, as soon as it touched the
lips of the God dripping with his wet beard, and being blown, sounded
the bidden retreat; 61 it was heard by all the waters both of earth and
sea, and stopped all those waters by which it was heard. 33 I. 343-366 Now the sea 62 again has a shore; their channels receive the
full rivers; the rivers subside; the hills are seen to come forth. The
ground rises, places increase in extent as the waters decrease;
and after a length of time, the woods show their naked tops, and retain
the mud left upon their branches. The world was restored; which when Deucalion beheld to be empty, and
how the desolate Earth kept a profound silence, he thus addressed
Pyrrha, with tears bursting forth:—“O sister, O wife,
O thou, the only woman surviving, whom a common origin, 63 and a
kindred descent, and afterwards the marriage tie has united to me, and whom now dangers themselves unite to me; we two are the whole
people of the earth, whatever both the East and the West behold;
of all the rest, the sea has taken possession. And even now there is no
certain assurance of our lives; even yet do the clouds terrify my mind.
What would now have been thy feelings, if without me thou hadst been
rescued from destruction, O thou deserving of compassion? In what
manner couldst thou have been able alone to support this terror?
With whom for a consoler, to endure these sorrows? For I, believe me,
my wife, if the sea had only carried thee off, should have followed
thee, and the sea should have carried me off as well. Oh that I could
replace the people that are lost by the arts of my father, 64 and infuse the soul into the moulded earth! Now 24 I. 365-382 the mortal race exists in us two alone . Thus it has seemed good
to the Gods, and we remain as mere samples of mankind.” EXPLANATION. Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, were, perhaps, originally three 34 I. 367-382 brothers, kings of three separate kingdoms. Having been deified each
retaining his sovereignty, they were depicted as having the world
divided between them; the empire of the sea falling to the share of
Neptune. Among his occupations, were those of raising and calming the
seas; and Ovid here represents him as being so employed. FABLE X. Deucalion and Pyrrha re-people the
earth by casting stones behind them, in the manner prescribed by the
Goddess Themis, whose oracle they had consulted. He thus spoke, and they wept.
They resolved to pray to the Deities of Heaven, and to seek relief
through the sacred oracles. There is no delay; together they repair to
the waters of Cephisus, 65 though not yet clear, yet now cutting their
wonted channel. Then, when they have sprinkled the waters poured on
their clothes 66 and their heads, they turn their steps to the temple
of the sacred Goddess, the roof of which was defiled with foul moss, and
whose altars were standing without fires. Soon as they reached the steps
of the temple, each of them fell prostrate on the ground, and,
trembling, gave kisses to the cold pavement. And thus they said: “If the Deities, prevailed upon by just prayers, are to be mollified,
if the wrath of the Gods is to be averted; tell us, O Themis, by
what art the loss of our race is to be repaired, and give thy
assistance, O most gentle Goddess to our ruined fortunes.”
The Goddess was moved, and gave this response: “Depart from my temple,
and cover your heads, 67 and loosen 25 I. 382-411 the garments 35 I. 382-410 girt around you , and throw behind your backs the bones of your
great mother.” For a long time they are amazed; and Pyrrha is the first
by her words to break the silence, and then refuses to obey the
commands of the Goddess; and begs her, with trembling lips, to grant her
pardon, and dreads to offend the shades of her mother by casting her
bones. In the meantime they reconsider the words of the response given, but involved in dark obscurity, and they ponder them among
themselves. Upon that, the son of Prometheus soothes the daughter of
Epimetheus with these gentle words, and says, “Either is my
discernment fallacious, or the oracles are just, and advise no
sacrilege. The earth is the great mother; I suspect that the stones
in the body of the earth are the bones meant; these we are ordered to
throw behind our backs.” Although she, descended from Titan, 68 is moved
by this interpretation of her husband, still her hope is involved in
doubt; so much do they both distrust the advice of heaven; but what harm
will it do to try? They go down, and they veil their heads, and ungird their garments,
and cast stones, as ordered, behind their footsteps. The stones (who
could have believed it, but that antiquity is a witness of the
thing? ) began to lay aside their hardness and their stiffness, and
by degrees to become soft; and when softened, to assume a new form. Presently after, when they were grown larger, a milder
nature, too, was conferred on them, so that some shape of man might be
seen in them , yet though but imperfect; and as if from the marble
commenced to be wrought , not sufficiently distinct, and very like
to rough statues. Yet that part of them which was humid with any
moisture, and earthy, was turned into portions adapted for the
use of the body. That which is solid, and cannot be bent, is changed
into bones; that which was just now a vein, still 36 I. 410-418 remains under the same name. 69 And in a little time, by 26 I. 411-423 the interposition of the Gods above, the stones thrown by the hands of
the man, took the shape of a man, and the female race was renewed
by the throwing of the woman. Thence are we a hardy generation, and able
to endure fatigue, and we give proofs from what original we are
sprung. EXPLANATION. In the reign of Deucalion, king of Thessaly, the course of the river
Peneus was stopped, probably by an earthquake. In the same year so great
a quantity of rain fell, that all Thessaly was overflowed. Deucalion and
some of his subjects fled to Mount Parnassus; where they remained until
the waters abated. The children of those who were preserved are the
stones of which the Poet here speaks. The Fable, probably, has for its
foundation the double meaning of the word ‘Eben,’ or ‘Aben,’ which
signifies either ‘a stone,’ or ‘a child.’ The Scholiast on Pindar tells
us, too, that the word λάος ,
which means people, formerly also signified ‘a stone.’ The brutal and savage nature of the early races of men may also have
added strength to the tradition that they derived their original from
stones. After the inundation, Deucalion is said to have repaired to
Athens, where he built a temple to Jupiter, and instituted
sacrifices in his honor. Some suppose that Cranaus reigned at Athens
when Deucalion retired thither; though Eusebius informs us it was under
the reign of Cecrops. Deucalion was the son of Prometheus, and his wife
Pyrrha was the daughter of his uncle, Epimetheus. After his death, he
received the honor of a temple, and was worshipped as a Divinity. FABLE XI. The Earth, being warmed by the heat of
the sun, produces many monsters: among others, the serpent Python, which
Apollo kills with his arrows. To establish a memorial of this event, he
institutes the Pythian games, and adopts the surname of Pythius. The Earth of her own accord brought
forth other animals of different forms; after that the former moisture
was thoroughly heated by the rays of the sun, and the mud and the wet
fens fermented with the heat; 37 I. 418-446 and the fruitful seeds of things nourished by the enlivening soil, as in
the womb of a mother, grew, and, in lapse of time, assumed some regular shape. Thus, when the seven-streamed Nile 70 has forsaken
the oozy 27 I. 423-445 fields, and has returned its waters to their ancient channel, and the
fresh mud has been heated with the æthereal sun, the laborers, on
turning up the clods, meet with very many animals, and among them, some
just begun at the very moment of their formation, and some they see still imperfect, and as yet destitute of some of their
limbs; and often, in the same body, is one part animated, the other part
is coarse earth. For when moisture and heat have been subjected to a due
mixture, they conceive; and all things arise from these two. And although fire is the antagonist of heat, yet a moist vapor
creates all things, and this discordant concord is suited for
generation; when, therefore, the Earth, covered with mud by the late
deluge, was thoroughly heated by the æthereal sunshine and a penetrating
warmth, it produced species of creatures innumerable; and partly
restored the former shapes, and partly gave birth to new monsters. She,
indeed, might have been unwilling, but then she produced thee as well,
thou enormous Python; and thou, unheard-of serpent, wast a source
of terror to this new race of men, so vast a part of a mountain
didst thou occupy. The God that bears the bow, and that had never before used such arms,
but against the deer and the timorous goats, destroyed him, overwhelmed
with a thousand arrows, his quiver being well-nigh exhausted, as the venom oozed forth through the black wounds; and that length of time
might not efface the fame of the deed, he instituted sacred games, 71 with contests 28 I. 443-454 famed in 38 I. 447-451 story , called “Pythia,” from the name of the serpent so conquered. In these, whosoever of the young men conquered in boxing, in
running, or in chariot-racing, received the honor of a crown of beechen
leaves. 72 As yet the laurel existed not, and Phœbus used to
bind his temples, graceful with long hair, with garlands from any
tree. EXPLANATION. The story of the serpent Python, being explained on philosophical
principles, seems to mean, that the heat of the sun, having dissipated
the noxious exhalations emitted by the receding waters, the reptiles,
which had been produced from the slime left by the flood, immediately
disappeared. If, however, we treat this narrative as based on historical facts, it is
probable that the serpent represented some robber who infested the
neighborhood of Parnassus, and molested those who passed that way for
the purpose of offering sacrifice. A prince, either bearing the
name of Apollo, or being a priest of that God, by his destruction
liberated that region from this annoyance. This event gave rise to the
institution of the Pythian games, which were celebrated near Delphi.
Besides the several contests mentioned by Ovid, singing, dancing, and
instrumental music, formed part of the exercises of these games. The
event which Ovid here places soon after the deluge, must have happened
much later, since in the time of Deucalion, the worship of Apollo was
not 39 I. 452-474 known at Delphi. The Goddess Themis then delivered oracles there, which,
previously to her time, had been delivered by the Earth. FABLE XII. Apollo , falling in love with Daphne,
the daughter of the river Peneus, she flies from him. He pursues her; on
which, the Nymph, imploring the aid of her father, is changed into a
laurel. Daphne , the daughter of Peneus, was
the first love of Phœbus; whom, not blind chance, but the vengeful anger
of Cupid assigned to him. The Delian God , 73 proud of having lately subdued the
serpent, 29 I. 454-481 had seen him bending the bow and drawing the string, and had said, “What
hast thou to do, wanton boy, with gallant arms? Such a burden as that better befits my shoulders; I, who am able to give unerring
wounds to the wild beasts, wounds to the enemy, who lately slew
with arrows innumerable the swelling Python, that covered so many acres of land with his pestilential belly. Do thou be contented to
excite I know not what flames with thy torch; and do not lay claim to
praises properly my own.” To him the son of Venus replies, “Let thy bow shoot all things,
Phœbus; my bow shall shoot thee; and as much as all animals fall
short of thee, so much is thy glory less than mine.” He thus said; and cleaving the air with his beating wings, with activity he
stood upon the shady heights of Parnassus, and drew two weapons out of
his arrow-bearing quiver, of different workmanship; the one repels, the
other excites desire. That which causes love is of gold, and is
brilliant, with a sharp point; that which repels it is blunt, and
contains lead beneath the reed. This one the God fixed in the Nymph, the
daughter of Peneus, but with the other he wounded the very marrow
of Apollo, through his bones pierced by the arrow . Immediately
the one is in love; the other flies from the very name of a
lover, rejoicing 40 I. 475-488 in the recesses of the woods, and in the spoils of wild beasts taken in hunting , and becomes a rival of the virgin Phœbe.
A fillet tied together 74 her hair, put up without any order.
Many a one courted her; she hated all wooers; not able to endure, and
quite unacquainted with man, she traverses the solitary parts of the
woods, and she cares not what Hymen, 75 what love, or what marriage
means. Many a time did her father say, “My daughter, thou owest me a
son-in-law;” 30 I. 481-505 many a time did her father say, “My daughter, thou owest me
grandchildren.” She, utterly abhorring the nuptial torch, 76 as
though a crime, has her beauteous face covered with the blush of
modesty; and clinging to her father’s neck, with caressing arms, she
says, “Allow me, my dearest father, to enjoy perpetual virginity; her
father, in times, bygone, granted this to Diana.” He indeed complied. But that very beauty forbids 41 I. 488-515 thee to be what thou wishest, and the charms of thy person are an
impediment to thy desires. Phœbus falls in love, and he covets an
alliance with Daphne, now seen by him, and what he covets he
hopes for, and his own oracles deceive him; and as the light stubble is
burned, when the ears of corn are taken off, and as hedges are set on
fire by the torches, which perchance a traveller has either held too
near them, or has left there , now about the break of day, thus
did the God burst into a flame; thus did he burn throughout his breast,
and cherish a fruitless passion with his hopes. He beholds her hair
hanging unadorned upon her neck, and he says, “And what would it
be if it were arranged?” He sees her eyes, like stars, sparkling
with fire; he sees her lips, which it is not enough to have merely seen; he praises both her fingers and her hands, and her
arms and her shoulders naked, from beyond the middle; whatever is hidden
from view, he thinks to be still more beauteous. Swifter than the light
wind she flies, and she stops not at these words of his, as he calls her
back: “O Nymph, daughter of Peneus, stay, I entreat thee! I am not an
enemy following thee. In this way the lamb flies from 31 I. 505-524 the wolf; thus the deer flies from the lion; thus the dove flies
from the eagle with trembling wing; in this way each creature
flies from its enemy: love is the cause of my following thee. Ah!
wretched me! shouldst thou fall on thy face, or should the brambles tear
thy legs, that deserve not to be injured, and should I prove the cause
of pain to thee. The places are rugged, through which thou art thus hastening; run more leisurely, I entreat thee, and
restrain thy flight; I myself will follow more leisurely. And yet,
inquire whom thou dost please; I am not an inhabitant of the
mountains, I am not a shepherd; I am not here, in rude
guise, 77 watching the herds or the flocks. Thou knowest not,
rash girl, thou knowest not from whom thou art flying, and therefore it
is that thou dost fly. 42 I. 516-531 The Delphian land, Claros and Tenedos, 78 A and the Pataræan palace pays
service to me. Jupiter is my sire; by me, what shall be, what has been,
and what is, is disclosed; through me, songs harmonize with the strings.
My own arrow , indeed, is unerring; yet one there is still more
unerring than my own, which has made this wound in my heart, before unscathed. The healing art is my discovery, and throughout
the world I am honored as the bearer of help, and the properties of
simples are 79 subjected to me. Ah, wretched me! 80 that love is
not to be cured by any herbs; and that those arts which afford relief to
all, are of no avail for their master.” 32 I. 525-537 The daughter of Peneus flies from him, about to say still more, with
timid step, and together with him she leaves his unfinished address.
Then, too, she appeared lovely; the winds exposed her form to view, and
the gusts meeting her fluttered about her garments, as they came in
contact, and the light breeze spread behind her B her careless locks; and thus , by her flight, was her beauty increased. But the youthful
God 81 has not patience any longer to waste his
blandishments; and as 43 I. 532-545 love urges him on, he follows her steps with hastening pace. As when the
greyhound 82 has seen the hare in the open field, and the one by the speed of his legs pursues his prey, the other seeks her safety; the one is like as if just about to fasten on the
other , and now, even now, hopes to catch her, and with nose
outstretched plies upon the footsteps of the hare . The other is 33 I. 537-562 in doubt whether she is caught already , and is delivered from his
very bite, and leaves behind the mouth just touching her. And so is the God, and so is the virgin; 83 he swift with
hopes, she with fear. Yet he that follows, aided by the wings of love, is the swifter, and
denies her any rest; and is now just at her back as she
flies, and is breathing upon her hair scattered upon her neck. Her
strength being now spent, she grows pale, and being quite faint,
with the fatigue of so swift a flight, looking upon the waters of
Peneus, she says, “Give me, my father, thy aid, if you rivers 44 I. 545-566 have divine power. Oh Earth, either yawn to swallow me , or by
changing it, destroy that form, by which I have pleased too much, and
which causes me to be injured.” Hardly had she ended her prayer, when a heavy torpor seizes
her limbs; and her soft breasts are covered with a thin bark. Her
hair grows into green leaves, her arms into branches; her feet, the
moment before so swift, adhere by sluggish roots; a leafy canopy overspreads her features; her elegance alone 84 remains in her.
This, too, Phœbus admires, and placing his right hand upon the stock, he
perceives that the breast still throbs beneath the new bark; and then , embracing the branches as though limbs in his arms, he
gives kisses to the wood, and yet the wood shrinks from his
kisses. To her the God said: “But since thou canst not be my wife, at
least thou shalt be my tree; my hair, my lyre, 85 my quiver shall
always have thee, oh laurel! Thou shalt be presented to the Latian
chieftains, when the joyous voice of the soldiers shall sing the song of
triumph, 86 and the long procession shall resort to the Capitol.
Thou, the same, shalt stand as a most 34 I. 563-568 faithful guardian at the gate-posts of Augustus before his doors, 87 and shalt protect the oak placed in the centre; and as my head is ever youthful with unshorn locks, do thou, too, always wear the
lasting honors of thy foliage.” Pæan had ended his speech ; the laurel nodded assent 45 I. 566-569 with its new-made boughs, and seemed to shake its top just like a
head. EXPLANATION. To explain this Fable, it must be laid down as a principle that there
were originally many Jupiters, and Apollos, and Mercuries, whose
intrigues being, in lapse of time, attributed to but one individual,
that fact accounts for the great number of children which claimed those
respective Gods for their fathers. Some prince probably, for whom his love of learning had acquired the
name of Apollo, falling in love with Daphne, pursued her to the brink of
the river Peneus, into which, being accidentally precipitated, she
perished in her lover’s sight. Some laurels growing near the spot,
perhaps gave rise to the story of her transformation; or possibly the
etymology of the word ‘Daphne,’ which in Greek signifies a laurel, was
the foundation of the Fable. Pausanias, however, in his Arcadia, gives
another version of this story. He says that Leucippus, son of Œnomaus,
king of Pisa, falling in love with Daphne, disguised himself in female
apparel, and devoted himself to her service. He soon procured her
friendship and confidence; but Apollo, who was his rival, having
discovered his fraud, one day redoubled the heat of the sun. Daphne and
her companions going to bathe, obliged Leucippus to follow their
example, on which, having discovered his stratagem, they killed him with
the arrows which they carried for the purposes of hunting. Diodorus Siculus tells us that Daphne was the same with Manto, the
daughter of Tiresias, who was banished to Delphi, where she delivered
oracles, of the language of which Homer availed himself in the
composition of his poems. The inhabitants of Antioch asserted that the
adventure here narrated happened in the suburbs of their city, which
thence derived its name of Daphne. FABLE XIII. Jupiter , pursuing Io, the daughter of
Inachus, covers the earth with darkness, and ravishes the Nymph. There is a grove of Hæmonia, 88 which
a wood, placed on a 35 I. 568-583 craggy rock, encloses on every side. They call it Tempe; 89 through this
the river Peneus, flowing from 46 I. 570-587 the bottom of mount Pindus, 90 rolls along with its foaming waves,
and in its mighty fall, gathers clouds that scatter a vapor like thin smoke, 91 and with its spray besprinkles the tops of the woods,
and wearies places, far from near to it, with its noise. This is the
home, this the abode, these are the retreats of the great river;
residing here in a cavern formed by rocks, he gives law to the waters,
and to the Nymphs that inhabit those waters. The rivers of that country
first repair thither, not knowing whether they should congratulate, or
whether console the parent; the poplar-bearing Spercheus, 92 and the
restless Enipeus, 93 the aged Apidanus, 94 the gentle Amphrysus, 95 and
Æas, 96 and, soon after, the other rivers, which, as their
current leads them, carry down into the sea their waves, wearied by
wanderings. Inachus 97 alone is absent, and, hidden in his 36 I. 583-600 deepest cavern, increases his waters with his tears, and in extreme
wretchedness bewails his daughter Io as lost; he knows not whether she now enjoys life, or whether she is among the shades below; but
her, whom he does not find anywhere, he believes to be nowhere, and in
his mind he dreads the worst. 47 I. 588-600 Jupiter had seen Io as she was returning from her father’s stream,
and had said, “O maid, worthy of Jove, and destined to make I know
not whom happy in thy marriage, repair to the shades of this lofty grove
(and he pointed at the shade of the grove) while it is warm, and while the Sun is at his height, in the midst of his course. But
if thou art afraid to enter the lonely abodes of the wild beasts alone, thou
shalt enter the recesses of the groves, safe under the protection of a
God, and that a God of no common sort; but with me , who
hold the sceptre of heaven in my powerful hand; me , who hurl the
wandering lightnings—Do not fly from me;” for now she was
flying. And now she had left behind the pastures of Lerna, 98 and the
Lircæan plains planted with trees, when the God covered the earth far
and wide with darkness overspreading, and arrested her flight, and
forced her modesty. EXPLANATION. The Greeks frequently embellished their mythology with narratives of
Phœnician or Egyptian origin. The story of Io probably came from Egypt.
Isis was one of the chief divinities of that country, and her worship
naturally passed, with their colonies, into foreign countries. Greece
received it when Inachus went to settle there, and in lapse of time
Isis, under the name of Io, was supposed to have been his daughter, and
the fable was invented which is here narrated by Ovid. The Greek authors, Apollodorus, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, and Pausanias,
say that Io was the daughter of Inachus, the first king of Argos; that
Jupiter carried her away to Crete; and that by her he had a son named
Epaphus, who went to reign in Egypt, whither his mother accompanied 37 I. 601-619 him. They also tell us that she married Apis, or Osiris, who, after his
death, was numbered among the Deities of Egypt by the name of Serapis.
From them we also learn that Juno, being actuated by jealousy, on the
discovery of the intrigue, put Io under the care of her uncle Argus,
a man of great vigilance, but that Jupiter having slain him, placed
his mistress on 48 I. 601-619 board of a vessel which had the figure of a cow at its head; from which
circumstance arose the story of the transformation of Io. The Greek
writers also state, that the Bosphorus, a part of the Ægean sea,
derived its name from the passage of Io in the shape of a cow. FABLE XIV. Jupiter , having changed Io into a cow,
to conceal her from the jealousy of Juno, is obliged to give her to that
Goddess, who commits her to the charge of the watchful Argus. Jupiter
sends Mercury with an injunction to cast Argus into a deep sleep, and to
take away his life. In the meantime Juno looked down
upon the midst of the fields, and wondering that the fleeting clouds had
made the appearance of night under bright day, she perceived that they
were not the vapors from a river, nor were they raised from the
moist earth, and then she looked around to see where her
husband was, as being one who by this time was full well acquainted with
the intrigues of a husband who had been so often detected. 99 After she had found him not in heaven, she said, “I am either
deceived, or I am injured;” and having descended from the height of
heaven, she alighted upon the earth, and commanded the mists to retire.
He had foreseen the approach of his wife, and had changed the features
of the daughter of Inachus into a sleek heifer. 100 As a cow, too, she is beautiful. The daughter of Saturn, though unwillingly,
extols the appearance of the cow; and likewise inquires, whose it is,
and whence, or of what herd it is, as though ignorant of the truth.
Jupiter falsely asserts that it was produced out of the earth, that the
owner may cease to be inquired after. The daughter of Saturn begs her of
him as a gift. What can he do? It is a cruel thing to deliver up
his own mistress, and not to give her up is a cause of
suspicion. It is shame which persuades him on the one hand, love 49 I. 619-647 dissuades him on the other. His shame would have been 38 I. 619-651 subdued by his love; but if so trifling a gift as a cow should be
refused to the sharer of his descent and his couch, she might well seem not to be a cow. The rival now being given up to her , the Goddess did not
immediately lay aside all apprehension; and she was still afraid
of Jupiter, and was fearful of her being stolen, until she gave her to
Argus, the son of Aristor, to be kept by him . Argus had his head
encircled with a hundred eyes. Two of them used to take rest in their
turns, the rest watched, and used to keep on duty. 101 In whatever
manner he stood, he looked towards Io; although turned away, he still used to have Io before his eyes. In the daytime he suffers
her to feed; but when the sun is below the deep earth, he shuts her up,
and ties a cord round her neck undeserving of such treatment . She
feeds upon the leaves of the arbute tree, and bitter herbs, and instead
of a bed the unfortunate animal lies upon the earth, that does
not always have grass on it , and drinks of muddy streams. And
when, too, she was desirous, as a suppliant, to stretch out her arms to
Argus, she had no arms to stretch out to Argus; and she uttered lowings
from her mouth, when endeavoring to complain. And at this sound she was terrified, and was affrighted at her own voice. She came, too, to the banks, where she was often wont to sport, the
banks of her father , Inachus; and soon as she beheld her new
horns in the water, she was terrified, and, astonished, she recoiled
from herself. The Naiads knew her not, and Inachus himself knew her not,
who she was; but she follows her father, and follows her sisters, and
suffers herself to be touched, and presents herself to them, as they
admire her . The aged Inachus held her some grass he had plucked;
she licks his hand, and gives kisses to the palms of her father. Nor
does she restrain her tears; and if only words would follow, she would
implore his aid, and 50 I. 648-671 would declare her name and misfortunes. Instead of words, letters, which
her foot traced in the dust, completed the sad discovery of the
transformation of her body. “Ah, wretched me!” exclaims her father
Inachus; and clinging to the horns and the neck 39 I. 651-674 of the snow-white cow, as she wept, he repeats, “Ah, wretched me! and
art thou my daughter, that hast been sought for by me throughout all
lands? While undiscovered, thou wast a lighter grief to me , than now, when thou art found. Thou art silent, and no words dost thou
return in answer to mine; thou only heavest sighs from the depth of thy
breast, and what alone thou art able to do, thou answerest in lowings to
my words. But I, in ignorance of this , was preparing the bridal
chamber, and the nuptial torches for thee; and my chief hope was
that of a son-in-law, my next was that of grandchildren. But now must
thou have a mate from the herd, now, too , an offspring of the
herd. Nor is it possible for me to end grief so great by death; but it
is a detriment to be a God; and the gate of death being shut against me,
extends my grief to eternal ages.” While thus he lamented, the starry Argus removed her away, and
carried the daughter, thus taken from her father, to distant
pastures. He himself, at a distance, occupies the lofty top of a
mountain, whence, as he sits, he may look about on all sides. Nor can the ruler of the Gods above, any longer endure so great
miseries of the granddaughter of Phoroneus; 102 and he calls his
son Mercury , whom the bright Pleiad, Maia , 103 brought
forth, and orders him to put Argus to death. There is but little
delay to take wings upon his feet, and his soporiferous wand 104 in
his hand, 51 I. 672-688 and a cap for his hair. 105 After he had put these things in
order, the son of Jupiter leaps down from his father’s high abode upon
the earth, and there he takes off 40 I. 674-694 his cap, and lays aside his wings; his wand alone was retained. With
this, as a shepherd, he drives some she-goats through the pathless
country, taken up as he passed along, and plays upon oaten straws joined
together. The keeper appointed by Juno, charmed by the sound of this new
contrivance, says, “Whoever thou art, thou mayst be seated with me upon
this stone; for, indeed, in no other place is the herbage more
abundant for thy flock; and thou seest, too, that the shade is
convenient for the shepherds.” The son of Atlas sat down, and with much
talking he occupied the passing day with his discourse, and by playing
upon his joined reeds he tried to overpower his watchful eyes. Yet the other strives hard to overcome soft sleep; and although sleep
was received by a part of his eyes, yet with a part he still keeps
watch. He inquires also (for the pipe had been but lately
invented) by what method it had been found out. EXPLANATION. The story of the Metamorphosis of Io has been already enlarged upon in
the Explanation of the preceding Fable. It may, however, not be
irrelevant to observe, that myths, or mythological stories or fables,
are frequently based upon some true history, corrupted by tradition in
lapse of time. The poets, too, giving loose to their fancy in their love
of the marvellous, have still further disfigured the original story; so
that it is in most instances extremely difficult to trace back the facts
to their primitive simplicity, by a satisfactory explanation of each
circumstance attending them, either upon a philosophical, or an
historical principle of solution. 52 I. 689-706 FABLE XV. Pan , falling in love with the Nymph
Syrinx, she flies from him; on which he pursues her. Syrinx, arrested in
her flight by the waves of the river Ladon, invokes the aid of her
sisters, the Naiads, who change her into reeds. Pan unites them into an
instrument with seven pipes, which bears the name of the Nymph. Then the God says, “In the cold
mountains of Arcadia, among the Hamadryads of Nonacris, 106 there was
one Naiad very famous; the Nymphs called her Syrinx. And not once alone had she escaped the Satyrs as they pursued, and whatever
Gods either the shady grove or the fruitful fields have in them .
In her pursuits and her virginity itself she used 41 I. 694-712 to devote herself to the Ortygian Goddess; 107 and being clothed
after the fashion of Diana, she might have deceived one, and might have
been supposed to be the daughter of Latona, if she had not had a bow of
cornel wood, the other, a bow of gold; and even then did she sometimes deceive people . Pan spies her as she is
returning from the hill of Lycæus, and having his head crowned with
sharp pine leaves, he utters such words as these;” it remained for
Mercury to repeat the words, and how that the Nymph, slighting his
suit, fled through pathless spots, until she came to the gentle stream
of sandy Ladon; 108 and that here, the waters stopping her course, she
prayed to her watery sisters, that they would change her; and how that Pan, when he was thinking that Syrinx was now caught by him, had
seized hold of some reeds of the 53 I. 706-721 marsh, instead of the body of the Nymph; and how , while he was
sighing there, the winds moving amid the reeds had made a murmuring
noise, and like one complaining; and how that, charmed by this
new discovery and the sweetness of the sound, he had said, “This mode of
converse with thee shall ever remain with me;” and that accordingly,
unequal reeds being stuck together among themselves by a cement of wax,
had since retained the name of the damsel. EXPLANATION. This appears to have been an Egyptian fable, imported into the works of
the Grecian poets. Pan was probably a Divinity of the Egyptians, who
worshipped nature under that name, as we are told by Herodotus and
Diodorus Siculus. As, however, according to Nonnus, there were not less
than twelve Pans, it is possible that the adventure here related may
have been supposed to have happened to one of them who was a native of
Greece. He was most probably the inventor of the Syrinx, or Pandæan
pipe, and, perhaps, formed his first instrument from the produce of the
banks of the River Ladon, from which circumstance Syrinx may have been
styled the daughter of that river. 42 I. 712-723 FABLE XVI. Mercury , having lulled Argus to sleep,
cuts off his head, and Juno places his eyes in the peacock’s tail. The Cyllenian God 109 being
about to say such things, perceived that all his eyes were sunk in
sleep, and that his sight was wrapped 110 in slumber. At once he puts
an end to his song, and strengthens his slumbers, stroking his languid
eyes with his magic wand. There is no delay; he wounds him, as he nods,
with his crooked sword, where the head is joined to the neck; and casts
him, all blood-stained, from the rock, and stains the craggy cliff with
his gore. Argus, thou liest low, and the light which thou hadst in so many eyes
is now extinguished; and one night 54 I. 722-733 takes possession of a whole hundred eyes. The daughter of Saturn
takes them, and places them on the feathers of her own bird, and she
fills its tail with starry gems. EXPLANATION. The ancient writers, Asclepiades and Pherecydes, tell us, that Argus was the
son of Arestor. He is supposed by some to have been the fourth king of
Argos after Inachus, and to have been a person of great wisdom and
penetration, on account of which he was said to have a hundred eyes. Io
most probably was committed to his charge, and he watched over her with
the greatest care. It is impossible to divine the reason why his eyes were said to have
been set by Juno in the tail of the peacock; though, perhaps, the
circumstance has no other foundation than the resemblance of the human
eye to the spots in the tail of that bird, which was consecrated to
Juno. Besides, if Juno is to be considered the symbol of Air, or Æther,
through which light is transmitted to us, it is not surprising that the
ancients bestowed so many eyes upon the bird which was consecrated to
her. 43 I. 723-747 FABLE XVII. Io , terrified and maddened with
dreadful visions, runs over many regions, and stops in Egypt, when Juno,
at length, being pacified, restores her to her former shape, and permits
her to be worshipped there, under the name of Isis. Immediately , she was inflamed with
rage, and deferred not the time of expressing her wrath; and she
presented a dreadful Fury before the eyes and thoughts of the Argive
mistress, 111 and buried in her bosom invisible stings, and drove
her, in her fright, a wanderer through the whole earth. Thou,
O Nile, didst remain, as the utmost boundary of her long
wanderings. Soon as she arrived there, she fell upon her knees, placed
on the edge of the bank, and raising herself up, with her neck thrown
back, and casting to Heaven those looks which then alone she could, by
her groans, and her tears, and her mournful lowing, she seemed to be
complaining of Jupiter, and to be begging an end of her sorrows. He, embracing the neck of his wife with his arms, 55 I. 734-759 entreats her, at length, to put an end to her punishment; and he says,
“Lay aside thy fears for the future; she shall never more be the
occasion of any trouble to thee;” and then he bids the Stygian
waters to hear this oath . As soon as the Goddess is pacified, Io receives her former shape, and she becomes what she was
before; the hairs flee from off of her body, her horns decrease, and the
orb of her eye becomes less; the opening of her jaw is contracted; her
shoulders and her hands return, and her hoof, vanishing, is disposed of
into five nails; nothing of the cow remains to her, but the whiteness of
her appearance; and the Nymph, contented with the service of two feet,
is raised erect on them ; and yet she is afraid to speak,
lest she should low like a cow, and timorously tries again the words so long interrupted. Now, as a Goddess, she is worshipped by the
linen-wearing throng 112 of Egypt . 44 I. 748-774 To her, at length, Epaphus 113 is believed to have been born
from the seed of great Jove, and throughout the cities he possesses
temples joined to those of his parent. Phaëton, sprung from the
Sun, was equal to him in spirit and in years; whom formerly, as he
uttered great boasts, and yielded not at all to him, and proud of
his father, Phœbus, the grandson of Inachus could not endure; and said,
“Thou, like a madman, believest thy mother in all things, and art
puffed up with the conceit of an imaginary father.” Phaëton blushed, and in shame repressed his resentment; and he
reported to his mother, Clymene, 114 the reproaches of Epaphus; and
said, “Mother, to grieve thee still more, I, the free, the bold youth , was silent; I am ashamed both that these reproaches
can be uttered against us, and that they cannot be refuted; but do 56 I. 760-779 thou, if only I am born of a divine race, give me some proof of so great
a descent, and claim me for heaven.” Thus he spoke, and threw his
arms around the neck of his mother; and besought her, by his own head
and by that of Merops, 115 and by the nuptial torches of his sisters,
that she would give him some token of his real father. It is a matter of doubt whether Clymene was more moved by the
entreaties of Phaëton, or by resentment at the charge made against her;
and she raised both her arms to heaven, and, looking up to the light of
the Sun, she said, “Son, I swear to thee, by this beam, bright with
shining rays, which both hears and sees us, that thou, that thou, I
say , wast begotten by this Sun, which thou beholdest; by this Sun , which governs the world. If I utter an untruth, let him deny
himself to be seen by me, and let this light prove the last for my eyes.
Nor will it be any prolonged trouble for thee to visit thy father’s
dwelling; the abode where he arises is contiguous to our regions. 116 45 I. 775-779 If only thy inclination disposes thee, go forth, and thou shalt inquire
of himself.” Phaëton immediately springs forth, overjoyed, upon these words of his
mother, and reaches the skies in imagination; and he passes by his own
Æthiopians, and the Indians situate beneath the rays of the Sun, 117 and briskly wends his way to the rising of his sire. EXPLANATION. To the elucidation of this narrative, already given, we will only add,
that some of the mythologists inform us, that when Mercury had lulled
Argus to sleep, a youth named Hierax awoke him; on which Mercury
killed Argus with a stone, and turned Hierax into a spar-hawk. 1. Forms changed into new bodies. ]—Ver. 1. Some commentators
cite these words as an instance of Hypallage as being used for ‘corpora
mutata in novas formas,’ ‘bodies changed into new forms;’ and they fancy
that there is a certain beauty in the circumstance that the proposition
of a subject which treats of the changes and variations of bodies should
be framed with a transposition of words. This supposition is perhaps
based rather on the exuberance of a fanciful imagination than on solid
grounds, as if it is an instance of Hypallage, it is most probably quite
accidental; while the passage may be explained without any reference to
Hypallage, as the word ‘forma’ is sometimes used to signify the thing
itself; thus the words ‘formæ deorum’ and ‘ferarum’ are used to signify
‘the Gods,’ or ‘the wild beasts’ themselves. 2. Favor my attempts. ]—Ver. 3. This use of the word
‘adspirate’ is a metaphor taken from the winds, which, while they fill
the ship’s sails, were properly said ‘adspirare.’ It has been remarked,
with some justice, that this invocation is not sufficiently long or
elaborate for a work of so grave and dignified a nature as the
Metamorphoses. 3. To my own times. ]—Ver. 4. That is, to the days of Augustus
Cæsar. 4. A rude and undigested mass. ]—Ver. 7. This is very similar
to the words of the Scriptures, ‘And the earth was without form and
void,’ Genesis, ch. i. ver. 2. 5. No Sun. ]—Ver. 10. Titan. The Sun is so called, on account
of his supposed father, Hyperion, who was one of the Titans. Hyperion is
thought to have been the first who, by assiduous observation, discovered
the course of the Sun, Moon, and other luminaries. By them he regulated
the time for the seasons, and imparted this knowledge to others. Being
thus, as it were, the father of astronomy, he has been feigned by the
poets to have been the father of the Sun and the Moon. 6. The Moon. ]—Ver. 11. Phœbe. The Moon is so called from the
Greek φοῖβος , ‘shining,’
and as being the sister of Phœbus, Apollo, or the Sun. 7. Amphitrite. ]—Ver. 14. She was the daughter of Oceanus and
Doris, and the wife of Neptune, God of the Sea. Being the Goddess of the
Ocean, her name is here used to signify the ocean itself. 8. Nature. ]—Ver. 21. ‘Natura’ is a word often used by the Poet
without any determinate signification, and to its operations are
ascribed all those phenomena which it is found difficult or impossible
to explain upon known and established principles. In the present
instance it may be considered to mean the invisible agency of the Deity
in reducing Chaos into a form of order and consistency. ‘Et’ is
therefore here, as grammarians term it, an expositive particle; as if
the Poet had said, ‘Deus sive natura,’ ‘God, or in other words,
nature.’ 9. The element of the vaulted heaven. ]—Ver. 26. This is a
periphrasis, signifying the regions of the firmament or upper air, in
which the sun and stars move; which was supposed to be of the purest
fire and the source of all flame. The heavens are called ‘convex,’ from
being supposed to assume the same shape as the terrestrial globe which
they surround. 10. The lowermost place. ]—Ver. 31. ‘Ultima’ must not be here
understood in the presence of ‘infima,’ or as signifying ‘last,’ or
‘lowest,’ in a strict philosophical sense, for that would contradict the
account of the formation of the world given by Hesiod, and which is here
closely followed by Ovid; indeed, it would contradict his own
words,—‘Circumfluus humor coercuit solidum orbem.’ The meaning
seems to be, that the waters possess the lowest place only in respect to
the earth whereon we tread, and not relatively to the terrestrial globe,
the supposed centre of the system, inasmuch as the external surface of
the earth in some places rises considerably, and leaves the water to
subside in channels. 11. Whoever of the Gods he was. ]—Ver. 32. By this expression
the Poet perhaps may intend to intimate that the God who created the
world was some more mighty Divinity than those who were commonly
accounted Deities. 12. Are some of them swallowed up. ]—Ver. 40. He here refers to
those rivers which, at some distance from their sources, disappear and
continue their course under ground. Such was the stream of Arethusa, the
Lycus in Asia, the Erasinus in Argolis, the Alpheus in Peloponnesus, the
Arcas in Spain, and the Rhone in France. Most of these, however, after
descending into the earth, appear again and discharge their waters into
the sea. 13. He commanded the plains. ]—Ver. 43. The use here of the word
‘jussit,’ signifying ‘ordered,’ or ‘commanded,’ is considered as being
remarkably sublime and appropriate, and serving well to express the ease
wherewith an infinitely powerful Being accomplishes the most difficult
works. There is the same beauty here that was long since remarked by
Longinus, one of the most celebrated critics among the ancients, in the
words used by Moses, ‘And God said, Let there be light, and there was
light,’ Genesis, ch. i. ver. 3. 14. On the right-hand side. ]—Ver. 45. The “right hand” here
refers to the northern part of the globe, and the “left hand” to the
southern. He here speaks of the zones. Astronomers have divided the
heavens into five parallel circles. First, the equinoctial, which lies
in the middle, between the poles of the earth, and obtains its name from
the equality of days and nights on the earth while the sun is in its
plane. On each side are the two tropics, at the distance of 23 deg. 30
min., and described by the sun when in his greatest declination north
and south, or at the summer and winter solstices. That on the north side
of the equinoctial is called the tropic of Cancer, because the sun
describes it when in that sign of the ecliptic; and that on the south
side is, for a similar reason, called the tropic of Capricorn. Again, at
the distance of 23½ degrees from the poles are two other parallels
called the polar circles, either because they are near to the poles, or
because, if we suppose the whole frame of the heavens to turn round on
the plane of the equinoctial, these circles are marked out by the poles
of the ecliptic. By means of these parallels, astronomers have divided
the heavens into four zones or tracks. The whole space between the two
tropics is the middle or torrid zone, which the equinoctial divides into
two equal parts. On each side of this are the temperate zones, which
extend from the tropics to the two polar circles. And lastly, the
portions enclosed by the polar circles make up the frigid zones. As the
planes of these circles produced till they reached the earth, would also
impress similar parallels upon it, and divide it in the same manner as
they divide the heavens, astronomers have conceived five zones upon the
earth, corresponding to those in the heavens, and bounded by the same
circles. 15. That which is the middle one. ]—Ver. 49. The ecliptic in
which the sun moves, cuts the equator in two opposite points, at an
angle of 23½ degrees; and runs obliquely from one tropic to another, and
returns again in a corresponding direction. Hence, the sun, which in the
space of a year, performs the revolution of this circle, must in that
time be twice vertical to every place in the torrid zone, except
directly under the tropics, and his greatest distance from their zenith
at noon, cannot exceed 47 degrees. Thus his rays being often
perpendicular, or nearly so, and never very oblique, must strike more
forcibly, and cause more intense heat in that spot. Being little
acquainted with the extent and situation of the earth, the ancients
believed it uninhabitable. Modern discovery has shown that this is not
the case as to a considerable part of the torrid zone, though with some
parts of it our acquaintance is still very limited. 16. Deep snow covers two. ]—Ver. 50. The two polar or frigid
zones. For as the sun never approaches these nearer than the tropic on
that side, and is, during one part of the year, removed by the
additional extent of the whole torrid zone, his rays must be very
oblique and faint, so as to leave these tracts exposed to almost
perpetual cold. 17. He placed as many more. ]—Ver. 51. The temperate zones,
lying between the torrid and the frigid, partake of the character of
each in a modified degree, and are of a middle temperature between hot
and cold. Here, too, the distinction of the seasons is manifest. For in
either temperate zone, when the sun is in that tropic, which borders
upon it, being nearly vertical, the heat must be considerable, and
produce summer; but when he is removed to the other tropic by a distance
of 47 degrees, his rays will strike but faintly, and winter will be the
consequence. The intermediate spaces, while he is moving from one tropic
to the other, make spring and autumn. 18. The brothers. ]—Ver. 60. That is, the winds, who, according
to the Theogony of Hesiod, were the sons of Astreus, the giant, and
Aurora. 19. Eurus took his way. ]—Ver. 61. The Poet, after remarking
that the air is the proper region of the winds, proceeds to take notice
that God, to prevent them from making havoc of the creation, subjected
them to particular laws, and assigned to each the quarter whence to
direct his blasts. Eurus is the east wind, being so called from its
name, because it blows from the east. As Aurora, or the morning, was
always ushered in by the sun, who rises eastward, she was supposed to
have her habitation in the eastern quarter of the world; and
often, in the language of ancient poetry, her name signifies the
east. 20. The realms of Nabath. ]—Ver. 61. From Josephus we learn that
Nabath, the son of Ishmael, with his eleven brothers, took possession of
all the country from the river Euphrates to the Red Sea, and called it
Nabathæa. Pliny the Elder and Strabo speak of the Nabatæi as situated
between Babylon and Arabia Felix, and call their capital Petra. Tacitus,
in his Annals (Book ii. ch. 57), speaks of them as having a king.
Perhaps the term ‘Nabathæa regna’ implies here, generally, the whole of
Arabia. 21. Are bordering upon Zephyrus. ]—Ver. 63. The region where the
sun sets, that is to say, the western part of the world, was assigned by
the ancients to the Zephyrs, or west winds, so called by a Greek
derivation because they cherish and enliven nature. 22. Boreas invaded Scythia. ]—Ver. 64 . Under the name of Scythia, the
ancients generally comprehended all the countries situate in the extreme
northern regions. ‘Septem trio,’ meaning the northern region of the
world, is so called from the ‘Triones,’ a constellation of seven stars,
near the North Pole, known also as the Ursa Major, or Greater Bear, and
among the country people of our time by the name of Charles’s Wain.
Boreas, one of the names of ‘Aquilo,’ or the ‘north wind,’ is derived
from a Greek word, signifying ‘an eddy.’ This name was probably given to
it from its causing whirlwinds occasionally by its violence. 23. The drizzling South Wind. ]—Ver. 66. The South Wind is
especially called rainy, because, blowing from the Mediterranean sea on
the coast of France and Italy, it generally brings with it clouds and
rain. 24. The forms of the Gods. ]—Ver. 73. There is some doubt what
the Poet here means by the ‘forms of the Gods.’ Some think that the
stars are meant, as if it were to be understood that they are forms of
the Gods. But it is most probably only a poetical expression for the
Gods themselves, and he here assigns the heavens as the habitation of
the Gods and the stars; these last, according to the notion of the
Platonic philosophers being either intelligent beings, or guided and
actuated by such. 25. Inhabited by the smooth fishes. ]—Ver. 74. ‘Cesserunt
nitidis habitandæ piscibus;’ Clarke translates ‘fell to the neat fishes
to inhabit.’ 26. Could rule over the rest. ]—Ver. 77. This strongly brings to
mind the words of the Creator, described in the first chapter of
Genesis, ver. 28. ‘And God said unto them— have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing that moveth upon the earth.’ 27. Framed him from divine elements. ]—Ver. 78. We have here
strong grounds for contending that the ancient philosophers, and after
them the poets, in their account of the creation of the world followed a
tradition that had been copied from the Books of Moses. The formation of
man, in Ovid, as well as in the Book of Genesis, is the last work of the
Creator, and was, for the same purpose, that man might have dominion
over the other animated works of the creation. 28. Read upon the brazen tables. ]—Ver. 91. It was the custom
among the Romans to engrave their laws on tables of brass, and fix them
in the Capitol, or some other conspicuous place, that they might be open
to the view of all. 29. Clarions of crooked brass. ]—Ver. 98. ‘Cornu’ seems to have
been a general name for the horn or trumpet; whereas the “tuba” was a
straight trumpet, while the ‘lituus’ was bent into a spiral shape. Lydus
says that the ‘lituus’ was the sacerdotal trumpet, and that it was
employed by Romulus when he proclaimed the title of his newly-founded
city. Acro says that it was peculiar to the cavalry, while the ‘tuba’
belonged to the infantry. The notes of the ‘lituus’ are usually
described as harsh and shrill. 30. Age of degenerated tendencies. ]—Ver. 128. ‘Vena’ signifies
among other things, a vein or track of metal as it lies in the
mine. Literally, ‘venæ pejoris’ signifies ‘of inferior metal.’ 31. Now as ships bounded. ]—Ver. 134. ‘Insultavere carinæ.’ This
line is translated by Clarke, ‘The keel-pieces bounced over unknown
waves.’ 32. To the Stygian shades. ]—Ver. 139. That is, in deep caverns,
and towards the centre of the earth; for Styx was feigned to be a river
of the Infernal Regions, situate in the depths of the earth. 33. Through the means of both. ]—Ver. 142. Gold forms, perhaps,
more properly the sinews of war than iron. The history of Philip of
Macedon gives a proof of this, as he conquered Greece more by bribes
than the sword, and used to say, that he deemed no fortress impregnable,
where there was a gate large enough to admit a camel laden with
gold. 34. Prematurely makes inquiry. ]—Ver. 148. Namely, by inquiring
of the magicians and astrologers, that by their skill in casting
nativities, they might inform them the time when their parents were
likely to die, and to leave them their property. 35. Astræa. ]—Ver. 150. She was the daughter of Astræus and
Aurora, or of Jupiter and Themis, and was the Goddess of Justice. On
leaving the earth, she was supposed to have taken her place among the
stars as the Constellation of the Virgin. 36. Olympus. ]—Ver. 154. Olympus was a mountain between Thessaly
and Macedonia. Pelion was a mountain of Thessaly, towards the Pelasgic
gulf; and Ossa was a mountain between Olympus and Pelion. These the
Giants are said to have heaped one on another, in order to scale
heaven. 37. There is a way on high. ]—Ver. 168. The Poet here gives a
description of the court of heaven; and supposing the galaxy, or Milky
Way, to be the great road to the palace of Jupiter, places the
habitations of the Gods on each side of it, and adjoining the palace
itself. The mythologists also invented a story, that the Milky Way was a
track left in the heavens by the milk of Juno flowing from the mouth of
Hercules, when suckled by her. Aristotle, however, suspected what has
been since confirmed by the investigations of modern science, that it
was formed by the light of innumerable stars. 38. The ennobled Deities. ]—Ver. 172. These were the superior
Deities, who formed the privy councillors of Jupiter, and were called
‘ Di majorum gentium,’ or, ‘Di consentes.’
Reckoning Jupiter as one, they were twelve in number, and are enumerated
by Ennius in two limping hexameter lines:— ‘Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars, Mercurius, Jovis, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.’ 39. The Gods of lower rank. ]—Ver. 173. These were the ‘Dii
minorum gentium,’ or inferior Deities. 40. Shook the awful locks. ]—Ver. 179. This awful nod of
Jupiter, the sanction by which he confirms his decrees, is an idea taken
from Homer; by whom it is so vividly depicted at the end of the first
book of the Iliad, that Phidias, in his statue of that God, admired for
the awful majesty of its looks, is said to have derived his conception
of the features from that description. Virgil has the same idea in the
Æneid, book x; ‘Annuit, et totum metu tremefecit Olympum.’ 41. Nereus. ]—Ver. 187. He was one of the most ancient of the
Deities of the sea, and was the son of Oceanus and Tethys. 42. The Nymphs. ]—Ver. 192. The terrestrial Nymphs were the
Dryads and Hamadryads, who haunting the woods, and the duration of their
existence depending upon the life of particular trees, derived their
name from the Greek word δρῦς , ‘an oak.’ The Oreades were nymphs who frequented the
mountains, while the Napeæ lived in the groves and valleys. There were
also Nymphs of the sea and of the rivers; of which, the Nereids were so
called from their father Nereus, and the Oceanitides, from Oceanus.
There were also the Naiads, or nymphs of the fountains, and many
others. 43. Thus when an impious band. ]—Ver. 200. It is a matter of
doubt whether he here refers to the conspiracies of Brutus and Cassius
against Julius Cæsar, or whether to that against Augustus, which is
mentioned by Suetonius, in the nineteenth chapter of his History. As
Augustus survived the latter conspiracy, and the parallel is thereby
rendered more complete, probably this is the circumstance here alluded
to. 44. Together with Cyllene. ]—Ver. 217. Cyllenus, or Cyllene, was
a mountain of Arcadia, sacred to Mercury, who was hence called by the
poets Cyllenius. Lycæus was also a mountain of Arcadia, sacred to Pan,
and was covered with groves of pine-trees. 45. Of the Molossians. ]—Ver. 226. The Molossi were a people of
Epirus, on the eastern side of the Ambracian gulf. Ovid here commits a
slight anachronism, as the name was derived from Molossus, the son of
Neoptolemus, long after the time of Lycaon. Besides, as Burmann
observes, who could believe that ‘wars could be waged at such an early
period between nations so distant as the Molossi and the Arcadians?’
Apollodorus says, that it was a child of the same country, whose flesh
Lycaon set before Jupiter. Other writers say that it was Nyctimus, the
son of Lycaon, or Arcas, his grandson, that was slain by him. 46. Upon the household Gods. ]—Ver. 231. This punishment was
awarded to the Penates, or household Gods of Lycaon, for taking such a
miscreant under their protection. 47. The savage Erinnys. ]—Ver. 241. Erinnys was a general name
given to the Furies by the Greeks. They were three in
number—Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megæra. These were so called, either
from the Greek ἔρις νοῦ ,
‘the discord of the mind,’ or from ἐν τῇ ἔρα ναίειν , ‘their inhabiting the earth,’ watching
the actions of men. 48. To place frankincense. ]—Ver. 249. In those early ages, corn
or wheaten flour, was the customary offering to the Deities, and not
frankincense, which was introduced among the luxuries of more refined
times. Ovid is consequently guilty of an anachronism here. 49. That a time should come. ]—Ver. 256. Lactantius informs us
that the Sibyls predicted that the world should perish by fire. Seneca
also, in his consolation to Marcia, and in his Quæstiones Naturales,
mentions the same destined termination of the present state of the
universe. It was a doctrine of the Stoic philosophers, that the stars
were nurtured with moisture, and that on the cessation of this
nourishment the conflagration of the universe would ensue. 50. The folds of his robe. ]—Ver. 267. ‘Rorant pennæ sinusque,’
is quaintly translated by Clarke, ‘his wings and the plaits of his coat
drop.’ 51. Iris. ]—Ver. 271. The mention of Iris, the goddess of the
rainbow, in connection with the flood of Deucalion, cannot fail to
remind us of the ‘bow set in the cloud, for a token of the covenant
between God and the earth,’ on the termination of Noah’s
flood.—Gen. x. 14. 52. The mouths of their fountains. ]—Ver. 281. The expressions
in this line and in line 283, are not unlike the words of the 11th verse
of the 7th chapter of Genesis, ‘The fountains of the great deep were
broken up.’ 53. The wolf swims. ]—Ver. 304. One commentator remarks here,
that there was nothing very wonderful in a dead wolf swimming among the
sheep without devouring them. Seneca is, however, too severe upon our
author in saying that he is trifling here, in troubling himself on so
serious an occasion with what sheep and wolves are doing: for he gravely
means to say, that the beasts of prey are terrified to that degree that
they forget their carnivorous propensities. 54. The Aonian. ]—Ver. 313. Aonia was a mountainous region of
Bœotia; and Actæa was an ancient name of Attica, from ἄκτη , the sea-shore. 55. By name Parnassus. ]—Ver. 317. Mount Parnassus has two
peaks, of which the one was called ‘Tichoreum,’ and was sacred to
Bacchus; and the other ‘Hypampeum,’ and was devoted to Apollo and the
Muses. 56. The Corycian Nymphs. ]—Ver. 320. The Corycian Nymphs were so
called from inhabiting the Corycian cavern in Mount Parnassus; they were
fabled to be the daughters of Plistus, a river near Delphi. There
was another Corycian cave in Cilicia, in Asia Minor. 57. The prophetic Themis. ]—Ver. 321. Themis is said to have
preceded Apollo in giving oracular responses at Delphi. She was the
daughter of Cœlus and Terra, and was the first to instruct men to ask of
the Gods that which was lawful and right, whence she took the name of
Themis, which signifies in Greek, ‘that which is just and right.’ 58. The native purple shells. ]—Ver. 332. ‘Murex’ was the name
of the shell-fish from which the Tyrian purple, so much valued by the
ancients, was procured. Some suppose that the meaning here is, that
Triton had his shoulders tinted with the purple color of the murex. It
is, however, more probable that the Poet means to say that he had his
neck and shoulders studded with the shells of the murex, perhaps as a
substitute for scales. 59. He bids him blow. ]—Ver. 333. There were several Tritons, or
minor sea gods. The one mentioned here, the chief Triton, was fabled to
be the son of Neptune and Amphitrite, who always preceded Neptune in his
course, and whose arrival he was wont to proclaim by the sound of his
shell. He was usually represented as swimming, with the upper part of
his body resembling that of a human being, while his lower parts
terminated with the tail of a fish. 60. The hollow-wreathed trumpet. ]—Ver. 335. The ‘Buccina,’ or,
as we call it, ‘the conch shell,’ was a kind of horn, or trumpet, made
out of a shell, called ‘buccinum.’ It was sometimes artificially curved,
and sometimes straight, retaining the original form of the shell. The
twisted form of the shell was one of the characteristic features of the
trumpet, which, in later times, was made of horn, wood, or metal, so as
to imitate the shell. It was chiefly used among the Romans, to proclaim
the watches of the day and of the night, which watches were thence
called ‘buccina prima,’ ‘secunda,’ etc. It was also blown at funerals,
and at festive entertainments, both before sitting down to table and
after. Macrobius tells us, that Tritons holding ‘buccinæ’ were fixed on
the roof of the temple of Saturn. 61. The bidden retreat. ]—Ver. 340. ‘Canere receptus’ was ‘to
sound the retreat,’ as the signal for the soldiers to cease fighting,
and to resume their march. 62. Now the sea. ]—Ver. 343. This and the two following lines
are considered as entitled to much praise for their terseness and
brevity, as depicting by their short detached sentences the
instantaneous effect produced by the commands of Neptune in reducing his
dominions to a state of order. 63. A common origin. ]—Ver. 352. Because Prometheus was the
father of Deucalion and Epimetheus of Pyrrha; Prometheus and Epimetheus
being the sons of Iapetus. It is in an extended sense that he styles her
‘sister,’ she being really his cousin. 64. The arts of my father. ]—Ver. 363. He alludes to the story
of his father, Prometheus, having formed men of clay, and animated them
with fire stolen from heaven. 65. The waters of Cephisus. ]—Ver. 369. The river Cephisus rises
on Mount Parnassus, and flows near Delphi. 66. Poured on their clothes. ]—Ver. 371. It was the custom of
the ancients, before entering a temple, either to sprinkle themselves
with water, or to wash the body all over. 67. Cover your heads. ]—Ver. 382. It was a custom among the
ancients to cover their heads in sacrifice and other acts of worship,
either as a mark of humility, or, according to Plutarch, that nothing of
ill omen might meet their sight, and thereby interrupt the performance
of the rites. 68. Descended from Titan. ]—Ver. 395. Pyrrha was of the race of
the Titans; for Iapetus, her grandfather, was the son of Titan and
Terra. 69. Under the same name. ]—Ver. 410. With his usual propensity
for punning, he alludes to the use of the word ‘vena,’ as signifying
either ‘a vein’ of the body, or a ‘streak’ or ‘vein’ in stone, according
to the context. 70. The seven-streamed Nile. ]—Ver. 423. The river Nile
discharges itself into the sea by seven mouths. It is remarkable for its
inundations, which happen regularly every year, and overflow the whole
country of Egypt. To this is chiefly owing the extraordinary fertility
of the soil of that country; for when the waters subside, they leave
behind them great quantities of mud, which, settling upon the land,
enrich it, and continually reinvigorate it. 71. Instituted sacred games. ]—Ver. 446. Yet Pausanias, in his
Corinthiaca, tells us that they were instituted by Diomedes; others,
again, say by Eurylochus the Thessalian; and others, by Amphictyon, or
Adrastus. The Pythian games were celebrated near Delphi, on the Crissæan
plain, which contained a race-course, a stadium of 1000 feet in
length, and a theatre, in which the musical contests took place. They
were once held at Athens, by the advice of Demetrius Poliorcetes,
because the Ætolians were in possession of the passes round Delphi. They
were most probably originally a religious ceremonial, and were perhaps
only a musical contest, which consisted in singing a hymn in honor of
the Pythian God, accompanied by the music of the cithara. In later
times, gymnastic and equestrian games and exercises were introduced
there. Previously to the 48th Olympiad, the Pythian games had been
celebrated at the end of every eighth year; after that period they were
held at the end of every fourth year. When they ceased to be solemnized
is unknown; but in the time of the Emperor Julian they still continued
to be held. 72. Crown of beechen leaves. ]—Ver. 449. This was the prize
which was originally given to the conquerors in the Pythian games. In
later times, as Ovid tells us, the prize of the victor was a laurel
chaplet, together with the palm branch, symbolical of his victory. 73. The Delian God. ]—Ver. 454. Apollo is so called, from having
been born in the Isle of Delos, in the Ægean Sea. The Peneus was a river
of Thessaly. 74. A fillet tied together. ]—Ver. 477. The ‘vitta’ was a band
encircling the head, and served to confine the tresses of the hair. It
was worn by maidens and by married women also; but the ‘vitta’ assumed
on the day of marriage was of a different form from that used by
virgins. It was not worn by women of light character, or even by the
‘libertinæ,’ or female slaves who had been liberated; so that it was not
only deemed an emblem of chastity, but of freedom also. It was of
various colors: white and purple are mentioned. In the later ages the
‘vitta’ was sometimes set with pearls. 75. Hymen. ]—Ver. 480. Hymen, or Hymenæus, was one of the Gods
of Marriage; hence the name ‘Hymen’ was given to the union of two
persons in marriage. 76. The nuptial torch. ]—Ver. 483. Plutarch tells us, that it
was the custom in the bridal procession to carry five torches before the
bride, on her way to the house of her husband. Among the Romans, the
nuptial torch was lighted at the parental hearth of the bride, and was
borne before her by a boy, whose parents were alive. The torch was also
used at funerals, for the purpose of lighting the pile, and because
funerals were often nocturnal ceremonies. Hence the expression of
Propertius,— ‘Vivimus inter utramque facem,’ ‘We are living
between the two torches.’ Originally, the ‘tædæ’ seem to have been slips
or lengths of resinous pine wood: while the ‘fax’ was formed of a bundle
of wooden staves, either bound by a rope drawn round them in a spiral
form, or surrounded by circular bands at equal distances. They were used
by travellers and others, who were forced to be abroad after sunset;
whence the reference in line 493 to the hedge ignited through the
carelessness of the traveller, who has thrown his torch there on the
approach of morning. 77. Here in rude guise. ]—Ver. 514. ‘Non hic armenta gregesve
Horridus observo’ is quaintly translated by Clarke, ‘I do not here in a
rude pickle watch herds or flocks.’ 78. Claros and Tenedos. ]—Ver. 516. Claros was a city of Ionia,
famed for a temple and oracle of Apollo, and near which there was a
mountain and a grove sacred to him. There was an island in the Myrtoan
Sea of that name, to which some suppose that reference is here made.
Tenedos was an island of the Ægean Sea, in the neighborhood of Troy.
Patara was a city of Lycia, where Apollo gave oracular responses during
six months of the year. It was from Patara that St. Paul took ship for
Phœnicia, Acts, xxi. 1, 2. 79. The properties of simples. ]—Ver. 522. The first cultivators
of the medical art pretended to nothing beyond an acquaintance with the
medicinal qualities of herbs and simples; it is not improbable that
inasmuch as the vegetable world is nourished and raised to the surface
of the earth in a great degree by the heat of the sun, a ground was
thereby afforded for allegorically saying that Apollo, or the Sun, was
the discoverer of the healing art. 80. Ah! wretched me! ]—Ver. 523. A similar expression
occurs in the Heroides, v. 149, ‘Me miseram, quod amor non est
medicabilis herbis .’ 81. The youthful God. ]—Ver. 531. Apollo was always represented
as a youth, and was supposed never to grow old. The Scholiast on the
Thebais of Statius, b. i., v. 694, says, ‘The reason is,
because Apollo is the Sun; and because the Sun is fire, which never
grows old.’ Perhaps the youthfulness of the Deity is here mentioned, to
account for his ardent pursuit of the flying damsel. 82. As when the greyhound. ]—Ver. 533. The comparison here of
the flight of Apollo after Daphne, to that of the greyhound after the
hare, is considered to be very beautifully drawn, and to give an
admirable illustration of the eagerness with which the God pursues on
the one hand, and the anxiety with which the Nymph endeavors to escape
on the other. Pope, in his Windsor Forest, has evidently imitated this
passage, where he describes the Nymph Lodona pursued by Pan, and
transformed into a river. His words are— ‘Not half so swift the trembling dove can fly, When the fierce eagle cleaves the liquid sky; Not half so swiftly the fierce eagle moves, When through the clouds he drives the trembling doves; As from the God she flew with furious pace, Or as the God more furious urged the chase. Now fainting, sinking, pale, the nymph appears; Now close behind, his sounding steps she hears; And now his shadow reached her as she run, His shadow lengthened by the setting sun; And now his shorter breath, with sultry air, Pants on her neck, and fans her parting hair.’ Both editions modernized Pope’s spelling; only the differences between
the two texts are marked. The greyhound was probably called ‘canis Gallicus,’ from having been
originally introduced into Italy from Gaul. ‘Vertagus’ was their Gallic
name, which we find used by Martial, and Gratian in his Cynegeticon,
ver. 203. 83. And so is the virgin. ]—Ver. 539. ‘Sic Deus et virgo est’ is
translated by Clarke , ‘So is the God and the young lady;’ indeed, he
mostly translates ‘virgo,’ ‘young lady.’ 84. Her elegance alone. ]—Ver. 552. Clarke translates ‘Remanet nitor
unus in illa,’ ‘her neatness alone continues in her.’ 85. My lyre. ]—Ver. 559. The players of the cithara, the
instrument of Apollo, were crowned with laurel, in the scenic
representations of the stage. 86. The song of triumph. ]—Ver. 560. The Poet here pays a
compliment to Augustus and the Roman people. The laurel was the emblem
of victory among the Romans. On such occasions the ‘fasces’ of the
general and the spears and javelins of the soldiers were wreathed with
laurel; and after the time of Julius Cæsar, the Roman general, when
triumphing, wore a laurel wreath on his head, and held a branch of
laurel in his hand. 87. Before his doors. ]—Ver. 562. He here alludes to the civic
crown of oak leaves which, by order of the Senate, was placed before the
gate of the Palatium, where Augustus Cæsar resided, with branches of
laurel on either side of it. 88. A grove of Hæmonia. ]—Ver. 568. Hæmonia was an ancient name
of Thessaly, so called from its king, Hæmon, a son of Pelasgus, and
father of Thessalus, from which it received its later name. 89. Call it Tempe. ]—Ver. 569. Tempe was a valley of Thessaly,
proverbial for its pleasantness and the beauty of its scenery. The river
Peneus ran through it, but not with the violence which Ovid here
depicts; for Ælian tells us that it runs with a gentle sluggish stream,
more like oil than water. 90. Mount Pindus. ]—Ver. 570. Pindus was a mountain situate on
the confines of Thessaly. 91. Like thin smoke. ]—Ver. 571. He speaks of the spray, which
in the fineness of its particles resembles smoke. 92. Spercheus. ]—Ver. 579. The Spercheus was a rapid stream,
flowing at the foot of Mount Æta into the Malian Gulf, and on whose banks many
poplars grew. 93. Enipeus. ]—Ver. 579. The Enipeus rises in Mount Othrys, and
runs through Thessaly. Virgil (Georgics, iv. 468) calls it ‘Altus
Enipeus,’ the deep Enipeus. 94. Apidanus. ]—Ver. 580. The Apidanus, receiving the stream of
the Enipeus at Pharsalia, flows into the Peneus. It is supposed by some
commentators to be here called ‘senex,’ aged, from the slowness of its
tide. But where it unites the Enipeus it flows with violence, so that it
is probably called ‘senex,’ as having been known and celebrated by the
poets from of old. 95. Amphrysus. ]—Ver. 580. This river ran through that part of
Thessaly known by the name of Phthiotis. 96. Æas. ]—Ver. 580. Pliny the Elder (Book iii, ch. 23 C )
calls this river Aous . It was a small limpid stream, running through Epirus
and Thessaly, and discharging itself into the Ionian sea. 97. Inachus. ]—Ver. 583. This was a river of Argolis, now known
as the Naio. It took its rise either in Lycæus or Artemisium, mountains
of Arcadia. Stephens, however, thinks that Lycæus was a mountain of
Argolis. 98. Lerna. ]—Ver. 597. This was a swampy spot on the Argive
territory, where the poets say that the dragon with seven heads, called
Hydra, which was slain by Hercules, had made his haunt. It is not
improbable that the pestilential vapors of this spot were got rid of by
means of its being drained under the superintendence of Hercules, on
which fact the story was founded. Some commentators, however, suppose
the Lerna to have been a flowing stream. 99. So often detected. ]—Ver. 606. Clarke translates ‘deprensi
toties mariti’ by the expression, ‘who had been so often catched in his
roguery.’ 100. Into a sleek heifer. ]—Ver. 611. Clarke renders the words,
‘nitentem juvencam,’ a neat heifer. 101. To keep on duty. ]—Ver. 627. ‘In statione manebant.’ This is
a metaphorical expression, taken from military affairs, as soldiers in
turns relieve each other, and take their station, when they keep watch
and ward. 102. Phoroneus. ]—Ver. 668. He was the father of Jasius and of
Inachus, the parent of Io. Some accounts, however, say that Inachus was
the father of Phoroneus, and the son of Oceanus. 103. Pleiad Maia. ]—Ver. 670. Maia was one of the seven daughters
of Atlas, who were styled Pleiädes after they were received among the
constellations. 104. Soporiferous wand. ]—Ver. 671. This was the ‘caduceus,’ or
staff, with which Mercury summoned the souls of the departed from the
shades, induced slumber, and did other offices pertaining to his
capacity as the herald and messenger of Jupiter. It was represented as
an olive branch, wreathed with two snakes. In time of war, heralds and
ambassadors, among the Greeks, carried a ‘caduceus.’ It was not used by
the Romans. 105. A cap for his hair. ]—Ver. 672. This was a cap called
‘Petasus.’ It had broad brims, and was not unlike the ‘causia,’ or
Macedonian hat, except that the brims of the latter were turned up at
the sides. 106. Nonacris. ]—Ver. 690. Nonacris was the name of both a
mountain and a city of Arcadia, in the Peloponnesus. 107. The Ortygian Goddess. ]—Ver. 694. Diana is called
“Ortygian,” from the isle of Delos, where she was born, one of whose
names was Ortygia, from the quantity of quails, ὄρτυγες , there found. 108. Ladon. ]—Ver. 702. This was a beautiful river of Arcadia,
flowing into the Alpheus: its banks were covered with vast quantities of
reeds. Ovid here calls its stream ‘placidum;’ whereas in the fifth book
of the Fasti, l. 89, he calls it ‘rapax,’ ‘violent;’ and in the second
book of the Fasti, l. 274, its waters are said to be ‘citæ aquæ,’ swift
waters. Some commentators have endeavored to reconcile these
discrepancies; but the probability is, that Ovid, like many other poets,
used his epithets at random, or rather according to the requirements of
the measure for the occasion. 109. The Cyllenian God. ]—Ver. 713. Mercury is so called from
Cyllene, in Arcadia, where he was born. 110. That his sight was wrapped. ]—Ver. 714. Clarke translates
‘Adopertaque lumina somno,’ ‘and his peepers covered with sleep.’ 111. The Argive mistress. ]—Ver. 726. Clarke renders ‘Pellicis
Argolicæ,’ ‘of the Grecian miss.’ 112. The linen-wearing throng. ]—Ver. 747. The priests, and
worshippers of Isis, with whom Io is here said to be identical, paid
their adoration to her clothed in linen vestments. Probably, Isis was
the first to teach the Egyptians the cultivation of flax. 113. Epaphus. ]—Ver. 748. Herodotus, in his second book, tells
us, that this son of Jupiter, by Io, was the same as the Egyptian God,
Apis. Eusebius, quoting from Apollodorus, says that Epaphus was the son
of Io, by Telegonus, who married her. 114. Clymene. ]—Ver. 756. She was a Nymph of the sea, the
daughter of Oceanus and Tethys. 115. Merops. ]—Ver. 763. He was king of Ethiopia , and marrying the Nymph
Clymene, was either the stepfather of Phaëton, or, as some writers say,
his putative father. 116. To our regions. ]—Ver. 773. Ethiopia, which, in the time of
Ovid, was generally looked upon as one of the regions of the East. 117. The rays of the Sun. ]—Ver. 778. ‘Ignibus sidereis,’ means
here the ‘heat,’ or ‘fire of the sun,’ the sun being considered as a
‘sidus,’ or ‘luminous heavenly body.’ Supplementary Notes ( added by transcriber ) A. In the McKay text, this and the following three footnotes—one full
page—were misprinted as 66-69 instead of 76-79. B. ...the light breeze spread behind her her careless locks. Read as
“...the light breeze spread her careless locks behind her.” In McKay,
“her / her” is printed at a line break and can easily be mistaken
for an error. C. Pliny the Elder (Book iii, ch. 23) Editions of Pliny vary;
the passage may also be found as ch. 58 or 145. 57 46 BOOK THE SECOND. FABLE I. Phaëton , insulted by Epaphus, goes to
the Palace of Apollo, to beseech him to give some token that he is his
son. Apollo, having sworn, by the river Styx, to refuse him nothing that
he should desire, he immediately asks to guide his chariot for one day.
He is unsuccessful in the attempt, and, the horses running away, the
world is in danger of being consumed. The palace of the Sun was raised
high, on stately columns, bright with radiant gold, and carbuncle that
rivals the flames; polished ivory covered its highest top, and double folding doors shone with the brightness of silver. The
workmanship even exceeded the material; for there Mulciber had
carved the sea circling round the encompassed Earth; and the orb of the
Earth, and the Heavens which hang over that orb. There the waves
have in them the azure Deities, both Triton, sounding with his
shell , and the changing Proteus, and Ægeon, 1 pressing the huge backs
of whales with his arms; Doris, 2 too, and her daughters, part of whom
appear to be swimming, part, sitting on the bank, to be drying their
green hair; some are seen borne upon fishes. The features in all
are not the same, nor, however, remarkably different: they
are such as those of sisters ought to be. The Earth has upon
it men and cities, and woods, and wild beasts, and rivers, and
Nymphs, and other Deities of the country. Over these is placed the
figure of the shining Heaven, and there are six Signs of the
Zodiac on the right door, and as many on the left. 58 II. 19-49 Soon as the son of Clymene had arrived thither by an ascending path,
and entered the house of his parent, thus doubted of; he
immediately turned his steps to the presence 47 II. 20-57 of his father, and stood at a distance, for he could not bear the
refulgence nearer. Arrayed in a purple garment, Phœbus was seated on a
throne sparkling with brilliant emeralds. On his right hand, and on his
left, the Days, the Months, the Years, the Ages, and the Hours were
arranged, at corresponding distances, and the fresh Spring was standing,
crowned with a chaplet of blossoms; Summer was standing naked, and
wearing garlands made of ears of corn; Autumn, too, was standing
besmeared with the trodden-out grapes; and icy Winter, rough with his
hoary hair. Then the Sun, from the midst of this place, with those eyes with
which he beholds all things, sees the young man struck with fear at the
novelty of these things, and says, “What is the occasion of thy
journey hither ? What dost thou seek, Phaëton, in this my palace, a son not to be denied by his parent?” He answers, “O thou universal Light of the unbounded World, Phœbus,
my father, if thou grantest me the use of that name; and if Clymene is
not concealing an error under a false pretext, give me, my
parent, some token, by which I may be believed to be really thy progeny;
and remove this uncertainty from my mind.” Thus he spoke; but his parent
took off the rays shining all around his head, and commanded him to come
nearer; and, having embraced him, he says, “ And neither art thou
deserving to be denied to be mine, and Clymene has told thee thy true
origin; and that thou mayst have the less doubt, ask any gift thou mayst
please, that thou mayst receive it from me bestowing it. Let the lake,
by which the Gods are wont to swear, and which is unseen, even by
my eyes, be as a witness of my promise.” Hardly had he well finished, when he asks for his father’s chariot,
and for the command and guidance of the wing-footed horses for one day.
His father repented that he had so sworn, and shaking his
splendid head 59 II. 49-77 three or four times, he said, “By thine have my words been made rash.
I wish I were allowed not to grant what I have promised!
I confess, my son, that this alone I would deny thee. Still, I may dissuade thee: thy desire is not attended with safety. Thou
desirest, Phaëton, a gift too great, and one which is
suited neither to thy strength, nor to such youthful years. Thy lot is
that of a mortal; that which thou desirest, belongs not to mortals. Nay , thou 48 II. 57-86 aimest, in thy ignorance, at even more than it is allowed the Gods above
to obtain. Let every one be self-satisfied, if he likes ; still,
with the exception of myself, no one is able to take his stand upon the
fire-bearing axle-tree. Even the Ruler of vast Olympus, who hurls the
ruthless bolts with his terrific right hand, cannot guide this chariot;
and yet , what have we greater than Jupiter? The first part of
the road is steep, and such as the horses, though fresh in
the morning, can hardly climb. In the middle of the heavens it is high
aloft, from whence it is often a source of fear, even to
myself, to look down upon the sea and the earth, and my breast
trembles with fearful apprehensions. The last stage is a steep descent,
and requires a sure command of the horses . Then, too, Tethys 3 herself, who receives me in her waves, extended below, is often wont to
fear, lest I should be borne headlong from above . Besides, the
heavens are carried round 4 with a constant rotation, and carry with
them the lofty stars, and whirl them with rapid revolution. Against
this I have to contend; and that force which overcomes all other
things, does not overcome me; and I am carried in a
contrary direction to the rapid world. Suppose the chariot given to
thee ; what couldst thou do? Couldst thou proceed, opposed to the
whirling poles, so that the rapid heavens should not carry thee away?
Perhaps, too, thou dost fancy in thy mind that there are groves, and
cities of the Gods, and temples 60 II. 77-103 enriched with gifts: whereas , the way is through dangers, and the
forms of wild beasts; 5 and though thou shouldst keep on thy road, and be
drawn aside by no wanderings, still thou must pass amid the horns of the
threatening Bull, and the Hæmonian 6 bow, and before the visage of
the raging Lion, and the Scorpion, bending his cruel claws with a wide
compass, and the Crab, that bends his claws in a different manner; nor
is it easy for thee to govern the 49 II. 86-121 steeds spirited by those fires which they have in their breasts, and
which they breathe forth from their mouths and their nostrils. Hardly
are they restrained by me, when their high-mettled spirit is once heated, and their necks struggle against the reins. But do thou have a
care, my son, that I be not the occasion of a gift fatal to thee, and
while the matter still permits, alter thy intentions. Thou
askest, forsooth, a sure proof that thou mayst believe thyself
sprung from my blood? I give thee a sure proof in thus being
alarmed for thee ; and by my paternal apprehensions, I am
shown to be thy father. Lo, behold my countenance! I wish, too,
that thou couldst direct thy eyes into my breast, and discover my
fatherly concern within! Finally, look around thee, upon whatever the
rich world contains, and ask for anything out of the blessings, so many
and so great, of heaven, of earth, and of sea; and thou shalt
suffer no denial. In this one thing alone I beg to be excused, which, called by its right name, is a penalty, and not an honor; thou
art asking, Phaëton, a punishment instead of a gift. Why, in thy
ignorance, art thou embracing my neck with caressing arms? Doubt not;
whatever thou shalt desire shall be granted thee (by the Stygian waves I
have sworn it); but do thou make thy desire more considerately.” He had finished his admonitions; and yet Phaëton 61 II. 103-129 resists his advice, and presses his point, and burns with eagerness for
the chariot. Wherefore, his parent having delayed as long as he could,
leads the young man to the lofty chariot, the gift of Vulcan. The
axle-tree was of gold, the poles were of gold; the circumference of the
exterior of the wheel was of gold; the range of the spokes was of
silver. Chrysolites and gems placed along the yoke in order, gave a
bright light from the reflected sun. And while the aspiring Phaëton is
admiring these things, and is examining the workmanship, behold! the
watchful Aurora opened her purple doors in the ruddy east, and her halls
filled with roses. The stars disappear, the troops whereof Lucifer
gathers, and moves the last from his station in the heavens. But the
father Titan, when he beheld the earth and the universe growing red, and
the horns of the far-distant Moon, as if about to vanish, orders the
swift Hours to yoke the horses. The Goddesses speedily perform his
commands, and lead forth the steeds from the lofty stalls, 50 II. 121-148 snorting forth flames, and filled with the juice of Ambrosia; and then they put on the sounding bits. Then the father touched the face of his son with a hallowed drug, and
made it able to endure the burning flames, and placed the rays upon his
locks, and fetching from his troubled heart sighs presaging his sorrow,
he said: “If thou canst here at least, my boy, obey the advice of thy
father, be sparing of the whip, and use the bridle with nerve. Of their
own accord they are wont to hasten on; the difficulty is to check them
in their full career. And let not the way attract thee through the five
direct circles. 7 There is a track cut 62 II. 130-164 obliquely, with a broad curvature, and bounded by the extremities of
three zones, and so it shuns the South pole, and the Bear united
to the North. Let thy way be here; thou wilt perceive distinct traces of
the wheels. And that heaven and earth may endure equal heat, neither
drive too low, nor urge the chariot along the summit of the sky. Going
forth too high, thou wilt set on fire the signs of the heavens; too low,
the earth; in the middle course thou will go most safely. Neither let
the right wheel bear thee off towards the twisted Serpent, nor let the
left lead thee to the low Altar; hold thy course between them. The rest
I leave to Fortune, who, I pray, may aid thee, and take more care
of thee, than thou dost of thyself. Whilst I am speaking, the moist
Night has touched the goals placed on the Western shores; delay is not
allowed me. I am required; the Morning is shining forth, the
darkness being dispersed. Seize the reins with thy hands; or if thou
hast a mind capable of change, make use of my advice, and not my
chariot, while thou art still able, and art even yet standing
upon solid ground; and while thou art not yet in thy ignorance filling
the chariot that thou didst so unfortunately covet.” 51 II. 149-181 The other leaps into the light chariot with his youthful body, and
stands aloft, and rejoices to take in his hand the reins presented to
him , and then gives thanks to his reluctant parent. In the meantime
the swift Pyroeis, and Eoüs and Æthon, the horses of the sun, and
Phlegon, making the fourth, fill the air with neighings, sending
forth flames, and beat the barriers with their feet. After Tethys,
ignorant of the destiny of her grandson, had removed these, and the
scope of the boundless universe was given them, they take the road, and
moving their feet through the air, they cleave the resisting clouds, and
raised aloft by their wings, they pass by the East winds that had arisen
from the same parts. But the weight was light; and such as the horses of
the sun could not feel; and the yoke was deficient of its wonted weight.
And as the curving ships, without proper ballast, are tossed about, and
unsteady, through their too great lightness, are borne through 63 II. 165-191 the sea, so does the chariot give bounds 8 in the air, unimpeded by its usual
burden, and is tossed on high, and is just like an empty one. Soon as the steeds have perceived this, they rush on, and leave the
beaten track, and run not in the order in which they did before.
He himself becomes alarmed; and knows not which way to turn the reins
entrusted to him , nor does he know where the way is, nor, if he
did know, could he control them. Then, for the first time, did the cold
Triones grow warm with sunbeams, and attempt, in vain, to be dipped in
the sea that was forbidden to them . And the Serpent which is
situate next to the icy pole, being before torpid with cold, and
formidable to no one, grew warm, and regained new rage from the heat.
They say, too, 9 that thou, Boötes, being disturbed, took to flight;
although thou wast but slow, and thy wain impeded thee. But when,
from the height of the skies, the unhappy Phaëton looked down upon the
earth, lying far, very far beneath, he grew pale, and his knees shook
with a sudden terror; and in a light so great, darkness overspread 52 II. 181-216 his eyes. And now he could wish that he had never touched the horses of
his father; and now he is sorry that he knew his descent, and that he
prevailed in his request; now desiring to be called the son of Merops.
He is borne along, just as a ship driven by the furious Boreas, to which
its pilot has given up the overpowered helm, and which he has
resigned to the Gods and the effect of his supplications. What
can he do? much of heaven is left behind his back; still more is before
his eyes. Either space he measures in his mind; and at one moment
he is looking forward to the West, which it is not allowed him by fate
to reach; and sometimes he looks back upon the East. Ignorant
what to do, he is stupeified ; 64 II. 191-217 and he neither lets go the reins, nor is he able to retain them; nor
does he know the names of the horses. In his fright, too, he sees
strange objects scattered everywhere in various parts of the heavens,
and the forms of huge wild beasts. There is a spot where the Scorpion
bends his arms into two curves, and with his tail and claws bending on
either side, he extends his limbs through the space of two signs of
the Zodiac . As soon as the youth beheld him wet with the sweat of
black venom, and threatening wounds with the barbed point of his
tail , bereft of sense, he let go the reins, in a chill of horror.
Soon as they, falling down, have touched the top of their backs, the
horses range at large: and no one restraining them, they go through the
air of an unknown region; and where their fury drives them thither,
without check, do they hurry along, and they rush on to the stars fixed
in the sky, and drag the chariot through pathless places. One while they
are mounting aloft, and now they are borne through steep places, and along headlong paths in a tract nearer to the earth. The Moon, too, wonders that her brother’s horses run lower than her
own, and the scorched clouds send forth smoke. As each region is most
elevated, it is caught by the flames, and cleft, it makes vast chasms, and becomes dry, its moisture being carried away. The grass
grows pale; the trees, with their foliage, are burnt up; and the dry
standing corn affords fuel for its own destruction. But I am
complaining of trifling ills . Great cities perish, together with
their fortifications, and the flames turn whole nations, with their
populations, into ashes; woods, together with mountains, 53 II. 216-223 are on fire. Athos 10 burns, and the Cilician Taurus, 11 and Tmolus, 12 65 II. 217-226 and Œta, 13 and Ida, 14 now dry, but once most famed
for its springs; and Helicon, 15 the resort of the Virgin Muses , and Hæmus , 16 not yet called Œagrian. Ætna 17 burns
intensely with redoubled flames, and Parnassus, with its two summits,
and Eryx, 18 and Cynthus, 19 and Othrys, and Rhodope, 20 at
length to be despoiled of its snows, and Mimas, 21 and Dindyma, 22 and
Mycale, 23 and Cithæron, 24 created for the 54 II. 223-241 performance of sacred rites. Nor does its cold avail even Scythia; Caucasus 25 is on fire, and Ossa with Pindus, and Olympus,
greater than them both, and the lofty Alps, 26 and the cloud-bearing
Apennines. 27 66 II. 227-243 Then, indeed, Phaëton beholds the world set on fire on all sides, and
he cannot endure heat so great, and he inhales with his mouth scorching
air, as though from a deep furnace, and perceives his own chariot to be
on fire. And neither is he able now to bear the ashes and the emitted
embers; and, on every side, he is involved in heated smoke. Covered with
a pitchy darkness, he knows not whither he is going, nor where he is,
and is hurried away at the pleasure of the winged steeds. They believe
that it was then that the nations of the Æthiopians contracted their
black hue, 28 the blood being attracted into the surface of the
body. Then was Libya 29 made dry by the heat, the moisture being
carried off; then, with dishevelled hair, the Nymphs lamented the
springs and the lakes. Bœotia bewails Dirce, 30 Argos Amymone, 31 and Ephyre 32 the waters of Pirene. Nor do rivers that have got
banks distant in 55 II. 241-251 situation, remain secure ; Tanais 33 smokes in the midst of its
waters, and the aged Peneus, and Teuthrantian 67 II. 243-251 Caïcus, 34 and rapid Ismenus, 35 with Phocean Erymanthus, 36 and Xanthus 37 again to burn, and yellow Lycormas, 38 and Mæander, 39 which sports with winding streams, and the Mygdonian Melas, 40 and the
Tænarian Eurotas. 41 The Babylonian Euphrates, too, was on fire, Orontes 42 was in flames, and the swift Thermodon 43 and Ganges, 44 and Phasis, 45 and Ister. 46 Alpheus 47 boils; the banks of Spercheus burn;
and the gold which Tagus 48 carries 56 II. 251-276 with its stream, melts in the flames. 68 II. 252-275 The river birds too, which made famous the Mæonian 49 banks of the
river with their song, grew hot in the middle of Caÿster. The Nile,
affrighted, fled to the remotest parts of the earth, and concealed his
head, which still lies hid; his seven last mouths are empty, become seven mere channels, without any stream. The same
fate dries up the Ismarian rivers , Hebrus together with
Strymon, 50 and the Hesperian 51 streams, the Rhine, and the Rhone,
and the Po, and the Tiber, to which was promised the sovereignty of the
world. All the ground bursts asunder; and through the chinks, the light
penetrates into Tartarus, and startles the Infernal King with his
spouse. The Ocean too, is contracted, and that which lately was sea, is
a surface of parched sand; and the mountains which the deep sea had
covered, start up and increase the number of the scattered
Cyclades. 52 The fishes sink to the bottom, and the crooked
Dolphins do not care to raise themselves on the surface into the air, as
usual. The bodies of sea calves float lifeless on their backs, on the
top of the water. The story, too, is, that even Nereus himself,
and Doris and their daughters, lay hid in the heated caverns. Three
times had Neptune ventured, with a stern countenance, to thrust his arms
out of the water; three times he was unable to endure the scorching heat
of the air. However, the genial Earth, as she was surrounded with sea,
amid the waters of the main, and the springs, dried up on every side,
which had hidden themselves in the bowels of their cavernous parent,
burnt-up, lifted up her all-productive face 53 as far as 69 II. 275-302 her neck, and placed her hands to her forehead, 57 II. 276-303 and shaking all things with a vast trembling, she sank down a little,
and retired below the spot where she is wont to be, and thus she spoke,
with a parched voice: “O sovereign of the Gods, if thou approvest
of this, if I have deserved it, why do thy lightnings linger? Let me, if doomed to perish by the force of fire, perish by thy flames;
and alleviate my misfortune, by being the author of it . With
difficulty, indeed, do I open my mouth for these very words;” (the vapor
had oppressed her utterance.) “Behold my scorched hair, and such a
quantity of ashes over my eyes, so much too , over my features.
And dost thou give this as my recompense? this, as the reward of my
fertility and of my duty, in that I endure wounds from the crooked
plough and harrows, and am harassed all the year through? In that I
supply green leaves for the cattle, and corn, a wholesome food for
mankind, and frankincense for yourselves? But still, suppose that I am
deserving of destruction, why have the waves deserved this ? Why
has thy brother deserved it? Why do the seas, delivered to him by lot,
decrease, and why do they recede still further from the sky? But if
regard for neither thy brother nor for myself influences thee, still
have consideration for thy own skies; look around, on either side, how each pole is smoking; if the fire shall injure them, thy
palace will fall in ruins. See! Atlas 54 himself is struggling, and
hardly can he bear the glowing heavens on his shoulders. If the sea, if
the earth perishes, if the palace of heaven, we are thrown 55 into the
confused state of ancient chaos. Save it from the flames, if aught still
survives, and provide for the preservation of the universe.” Thus spoke the Earth; nor, indeed, could she any longer endure the
vapor, nor say more; and she withdrew 70 II. 303-304 her face within herself, and the caverns neighboring to the shades
below. EXPLANATION. If we were to regard this fable solely as an allegory intended to convey 58 II. 304-310 a moral, we should at once perceive that the adventure of Phaëton
represents the wilful folly of a rash young man, who consults his own
inclination, rather than the dictates of wisdom and prudence. Some
ancient writers tell us that Phaëton was the son of Phœbus and Clymene,
while others make the nymph Rhoda to have been his mother. Apollodorus,
following Hesiod, says that Hersa, the daughter of Cecrops, king of
Athens, was the mother of Cephalus, who was carried away by Aurora;
which probably means that he left Greece for the purpose of settling in
the East. Cephalus had a son named Tithonus, the father of Phaëton. Thus
Phaëton was the fourth in lineal descent from Cecrops, who reigned at
Athens about 1580, B.C. The story is
most probably based upon the fact of some excessive heat that happened
in his time. Aristotle supposes that at that period flames fell from
heaven, which ravaged several countries. Possibly the burning of the
cities of the plain, or the stay of the sun in his course at the command
of Joshua, may have been the foundation of the story. St. Chrysostom
suggests that it is based upon an imperfect version of the ascent of
Elijah in a chariot of fire; that name, or rather ‘Elias,’ the Greek form of it,
bearing a strong resemblance to Ἥλιος , the Greek name of the sun. Vossius suggests that
this is an Egyptian history, and considers the story of the grief of
Phœbus for the loss of his son to be another version of the sorrows of
the Egyptians for the death of Osiris. The tears of the Heliades, or
sisters of Phaëton, he conceives to be identical with the lamentations
of the women who wept for the death of Thammuz. The Poet, when he tells
us that Phaëton abandoned his chariot on seeing The Scorpion, probably
intends to show that the event of which he treats happened in the month
in which the sun enters that sign. Plutarch and Tzetzes tell us that Phaëton was a king of the Molossians,
who drowned himself in the Po; that he was a student of astronomy, and
foretold an excessive heat which happened in his reign, and laid waste
his kingdom. Lucian, also, in his Discourse on Astronomy, gives a
similar explanation of the story, and says that this prince dying very
young, left his observations imperfect, which gave rise to the fable
that he did not know how to drive the chariot of the sun to the end of
its course. FABLE II. Jupiter , to save the universe from
being consumed, hurls his thunder at Phaëton, on which he falls headlong
into the river Eridanus. But the omnipotent father, having
called the Gods 71 II. 305-330 above to witness, and him, too, who had given the chariot to
Phaëton , that unless he gives assistance, all things will perish in
direful ruin, mounts aloft to the highest eminence, from which he is
wont to spread the clouds over the spacious earth; from which he moves
his thunders, and hurls the brandished lightnings. But then, he had
neither clouds that he could 59 II. 310-335 draw over the earth, nor showers that he could pour down from the sky.
He thundered aloud, and darted the poised lightning from his right ear
against the charioteer, and at the same moment deprived him both of his
life and his seat, and by his ruthless fires restrained the flames. The
horses are affrighted, and, making a bound in an opposite direction,
they shake the yoke from off their necks, and disengage themselves from
the torn harness. In one place lie the reins; in another, the axle-tree
wrenched away from the pole; in another part are the spokes of
the broken wheels; and the fragments of the chariot torn in pieces are
scattered far and wide. But Phaëton, the flames consuming his yellow
hair, is hurled headlong, and is borne in a long tract through the air; as sometimes a star from the serene sky may appear to
fall, although it really has not fallen. Him the great Eridanus
receives, in a part of the world far distant from his country, and
bathes his foaming face. FABLE III. The sisters of Phaëton are changed into
poplars, and their tears become amber distilling from those trees. The Hesperian Naiads 56 commit his
body, smoking from the three-forked flames, to the tomb, and inscribe
these verses on the stone:—“Here is Phaëton buried, the driver of
his father’s chariot, which if he did not manage, still he miscarried in
a great attempt.” But his wretched father had hidden his face, overcast
with bitter sorrow, and, if only we can believe it, they say 72 II. 331-359 that one day passed without the sun. 57 The flames afforded light; and so far , there was some advantage in that disaster. But Clymene,
after she had said whatever things were to be said amid misfortunes so
great, traversed the whole earth, full of woe, and distracted, and
tearing her bosom. 60 II. 335-366 And first seeking his lifeless limbs, and then his bones, she
found his bones, however, buried on a foreign bank. She laid herself
down on the spot; and bathed with tears the name she read on the marble,
and warmed it with her open breast. The daughters of the Sun mourn no
less, and give tears, an unavailing gift, to his death; and beating
their breasts with their hands, they call Phaëton both night and day,
who is doomed not to hear their sad complaints; and they lie scattered
about the tomb. The Moon had four times filled her disk, by joining her horns; they,
according to their custom (for use had made custom), uttered
lamentations; among whom Phaëthusa, the eldest of the sisters, when she
was desirous to lie on the ground, complained that her feet had grown
stiff; to whom the fair Lampetie attempting to come, was detained by a
root suddenly formed. A third, when she is endeavoring to tear her
hair with her hands, tears off leaves; one complains that her legs are
held fast by the trunk of a tree, another that her arms are become long
branches. And while they are wondering at these things, bark closes upon
their loins; and by degrees, it encompasses their stomachs, their
breasts, their shoulders, and their hands; and only their mouths are
left uncovered, calling upon their mother. What is their mother to do?
but run here and there, whither frenzy leads her, and join her lips with theirs , while yet she may? That is not enough; she
tries to pull their bodies out of the trunks of the trees , and
with her hands to tear away the tender 73 II. 360-380 branches; but from thence drops of blood flow as from a wound. Whichever of them is wounded, cries out, “Spare me, mother, O spare
me, I pray; in the tree my body is being torn. And now farewell.”
The bark came over the last words. Thence tears flow forth; and amber distilling from the new-formed
branches, hardens in the sun; which the clear river receives and sends
to be worn by the Latian matrons. 61 II. 367- 391 FABLE IV. Cycnus , king of Liguria, inconsolable
for the death of Phaëton, is transformed into a swan. Cycnus , the son of Sthenelus, 58 was present at this strange event; who, although he was related to thee,
Phaëton, on his mother’s side, was yet more nearly allied in affection.
He having left his kingdom (for he reigned over the people and the great
cities of the Ligurians 59 ) was filling the verdant banks and the river
Eridanus, and the wood, now augmented by the sisters, with his
complaints; when the man’s voice became shrill, and gray feathers
concealed his hair. A long neck, too, extends from his breast, and
a membrane joins his reddening toes; feathers clothe his sides, and his mouth holds a bill without a point. Cycnus becomes a new
bird; but he trusts himself not to the heavens or the air, as being
mindful of the fire unjustly sent from thence. He frequents the pools
and the wide lakes, and abhorring fire, he chooses the streams, the very contrary of flames. 74 II. 381-400 Meanwhile, the father of Phaëton, in squalid garb, and destitute of
his comeliness, just as he is wont to be when he suffers an eclipse of
his disk, abhors both the light, himself, and the day; and gives his
mind up to grief, and adds resentment to his sorrow, and denies his
services to the world. “My lot,” says he, “has been restless enough from
the very beginning of time, and I am tired of labors endured by
me, without end and without honor. Let any one else drive the chariot
that carries the light. If there is no one, and all the Gods confess
that they cannot do it, let Jupiter himself drive it; that, at
least, while he is trying my reins, he may for a time lay aside the
lightnings that bereave fathers. Then he will know, 62 II. 392-408 having made trial of the strength of the flame-footed steeds, that he
who did not successfully guide them, did not deserve death.” All the Deities stand around the Sun, as he says such things; and
they entreat him, with suppliant voice, not to determine to bring
darkness over the world. Jupiter, as well, excuses the hurling of his
lightnings, and imperiously adds threats to entreaties. Phœbus calls
together his steeds, maddened and still trembling with terror, and,
subduing them, vents his fury both with whip and lash; for he is
furious, and upbraids them with his son, and charges his death upon them. EXPLANATION. Plutarch places the tomb of Phaëton on the banks of the river Po; and it
is not improbable that his mother and sisters, grieving at his fate,
ended their lives in the neighborhood of his tomb, being overcome with
grief, which gave rise to the story that they were changed into the
poplars on its banks, which distilled amber. Some writers say, that they
were changed into larch trees, and not poplars. Hesiod and Pindar also
make mention of this tradition. Possibly, Cycnus, being a friend of
Phaëton, may have died from grief at his loss, on which the poets graced
his attachment with the story that he was changed into a swan.
Apollodorus mentions two other persons of the name of Cycnus. One was
the son of Mars, and was killed before Troy; the other, as Hesiod tells
us, was killed by Hercules. Lucian, in his satirical vein, tells us,
that inquiring on the banks of the Po for the swans, and the poplars
distilling amber, he was told that no such things had ever been seen
there; and that even the tradition of Phaëton and his sisters was
utterly unknown to the inhabitants of those parts. 75 II. 401-422 FABLE V. Jupiter , while taking a survey of the
world, to extinguish the remains of the fire, falls in love with
Calisto, whom he sees in Arcadia; and, in order to seduce that Nymph, he
assumes the form of Diana. Her sister Nymphs disclose her misfortune
before the Goddess, who drives her from her company, on account of the
violation of her vow of chastity. But the omnipotent father surveys
the vast walls of heaven, and carefully searches, that no part, impaired
by the violence of the fire, may fall to ruin. After he has seen them to
be secure and in their own full strength, he examines the earth,
and the works of man; yet a care for his own Arcadia is more
particularly his object. He restores, too, the springs and the rivers,
that had not yet dared to flow, he gives grass to the earth: green
leaves to the trees; and orders the injured forests 63 II. 408-438 again to be green. While thus he often went to and fro, he
stopped short on seeing a virgin of Nonacris, and the fires
engendered within his bones received fresh heat. It was not her
employment to soften the wool by teasing, nor to vary her tresses in
their arrangement; while a buckle fastened her garment, and a white
fillet her hair, carelessly flowing; and at one time she bore in her
hand a light javelin, at another, a bow. She was a warrior of
Phœbe; nor did any Nymph frequent Mænalus, more beloved by
Trivia, 60 than she; but no influence is of long duration. The
lofty Sun had now obtained a position beyond the mid course, when
she enters a grove which no generation had ever cut. Here she
puts her quiver off from her shoulders, and unbends her pliant bow, and
lies down on the ground, which the grass had covered, and presses her
painted quiver, with her neck laid on it. When Jupiter saw her thus weary, and without a protector, 76 II. 423-449 he said, “For certain, my wife will know nothing of this stolen embrace;
or, if she should chance to know, is her scolding, is it, I say ,
of such great consequence?” Immediately he puts on the form and dress of Diana, and says,
“O Virgin! one portion of my train, upon what mountains hast thou
been hunting?” The virgin raises herself from the turf, and says, “Hail,
Goddess! that art , in my opinion, greater than Jove, even if he
himself should hear it.” He both smiles and he hears it, and is pleased
at being preferred to himself; and he gives her kisses, not very
moderate, nor such as would be given by a virgin. He stops her as she is
preparing to tell him in what wood she has been hunting, by an embrace,
and he does not betray himself without the commission of
violence . She, indeed, on the other hand, as far as a woman could do
(would that thou hadst seen her, daughter of Saturn, then thou
wouldst have been more merciful), she, indeed, I say , resists;
but what damsel, or who besides , could prevail against Jupiter?
Jove, now the conqueror, seeks the heavens above; the grove and
the conscious 64 II. 438-465 wood is now her aversion. Making her retreat thence, she is
almost forgetting to take away her quiver with her arrows, and the bow
which she had hung up. Behold, Dictynna, 61 attended by her train, as she goes along the
lofty Mænalus, and exulting in the slaughter of the wild beasts, beholds
her, and calls her, thus seen. Being so called, she drew back, and at
first was afraid lest Jupiter might be under her shape ; but after
she saw the Nymphs walking along with her, she perceived that there was
no deceit, 62 and she approached their train. Alas! how difficult
it is not to betray a crime by one’s looks! She scarce raises her eyes
from the ground, nor, as she used to do, does she walk by the side of
the Goddess, nor is she the foremost in the whole company; 77 II. 450-470 but she is silent, and by her blushes she gives signs of her injured
honor. And Diana, but for the fact , that she is a virgin, might
have perceived her fault by a thousand indications; the Nymphs are said
to have perceived it. The horns of the Moon were now rising again in her ninth
course, when the hunting Goddess, faint from her brother’s flames,
lighted on a cool grove, out of which a stream ran, flowing with its
murmuring noise, and borne along the sand worn fine by its
action . When she had approved of the spot, she touched the surface
of the water with her foot; and commending it as well, she says, “All
overlookers are far off; let us bathe our bodies, with the stream poured
over them.” She of Parrhasia 63 blushed; they all put off their
clothes; she alone sought an excuse for delay. Her garment was
removed as she hesitated, which being put off, her fault was exposed
with her naked body. Cynthia said to her, in confusion, and endeavoring
to conceal her stomach with her hands, “Begone afar hence! and pollute
not the sacred springs;” and she ordered her to leave her train. 65 II. 465-486 FABLES VI AND VII. Juno , being jealous that Calisto has
attracted Jupiter, transforms her into a Bear. Her son, Arcas, not
recognizing his mother in that shape, is about to kill her; but Jupiter
removes them both to the skies, where they form the Constellations of
the Great and the Little Bear. The raven, as a punishment for his
garrulity, is changed from white to black. The spouse of the great Thunderer
had perceived this some time before, and had put off the severe
punishment designed for her , to a proper time. There is now no reason for delay; and now the boy Arcas (that, too, was a
grief to Juno) was born of the mistress of her husband .
Wherefore, she turned her thoughts, full of 78 II. 470-494 resentment, and her eyes upon her , and said, “This thing,
forsooth, alone was wanting, thou adulteress, that thou shouldst be
pregnant, and that my injury should become notorious by thy labors, and
that thereby the disgraceful conduct of my husband ,
Jupiter, should be openly declared. Thou shalt not go unpunished; for I
will spoil that shape of thine, on which thou pridest thyself, and by
which thou, mischievous one, 64 dost charm my husband.” Thus she spoke; and seizing her straight in front by the
hair, 65 threw her on her face to the ground. She suppliantly
stretched forth her arms; those arms began to grow rough with black
hair, 66 and her hands to be bent, and to increase to hooked
claws, and to do the duty of feet, and the mouth, that was once admired
by Jupiter, to become deformed with a wide opening; and lest her
prayers, and words not needed, should influence her feelings, the power
of speech is taken from her; an angry and threatening voice, and full of
terror, is uttered from her hoarse throat. Still, her former
understanding remains in her, even thus become a bear; and expressing
her 66 II. 486-519 sorrows by her repeated groans, she lifts up her hands, such as they
are, to heaven and to the stars, and she deems Jove ungrateful, though
she cannot call him so. Ah! how often, not daring to rest in the lonely
wood, did she wander about before her own house, and in the fields once
her own. Ah! how often was she driven over the crags by the cry of the
hounds; and, a huntress herself, she fled in alarm, through fear of
the hunters! Often, seeing the wild beasts, did she 79 II. 494-521 lie concealed, forgetting what she was; and, a bear herself,
dreaded the he-bears seen on the mountains, and was alarmed at the
wolves, though her father was among them. Behold! Arcas, the offspring of the daughter of Lycaon, ignorant of
who is his parent, approaches her, thrice five birthdays being now
nearly past; and while he is following the wild beasts, while he is
choosing the proper woods, and is enclosing the Erymanthian forests 67 with his platted nets, he meets with his mother. She stood still, upon
seeing Arcas, and was like one recognizing another . He drew back,
and, in his ignorance, was alarmed at her keeping her eyes fixed upon
him without ceasing; and, as she was desirous to approach still nearer,
he would have pierced her breast with the wounding spear. Omnipotent Jove averted this, and removed both them and such wickedness; and placed them, carried through vacant space with a rapid
wind, in the heavens, and made them neighboring Constellations. Juno swelled with rage after the mistress shone amid the stars, and
descended on the sea to the hoary Tethys, and the aged Ocean,
a regard for whom has often influenced the Gods; and said to them,
inquiring the reason of her coming, “Do you inquire why I, the queen of
the Gods, am come hither from the æthereal abodes? Another has
possession of heaven in my stead. May I be deemed untruthful, if, when
the night has made the world dark, you see not in the highest part of
heaven stars but lately thus honored to my affliction; there,
where the last and most limited circle surrounds the extreme part of the
axis of the world . Is there, then, any ground why one
should hesitate to affront Juno, and dread my being offended, who only
benefit them by my resentment? 67 II. 520-550 See what a great thing I have done! How vast is my power! I forbade
her to be of human shape; she has been made a Goddess; ’tis thus that I
inflict punishment on offenders; such is my 80 II. 522-550 mighty power! Let him obtain for her her former shape, and let
him remove this form of a wild beast; as he formerly did for the Argive
Phoronis. Why does he not marry her as well, divorcing Juno, and place
her in my couch, and take Lycaon for his father-in-law? But if the wrong
done to your injured foster-child affects you, drive the seven Triones
away from your azure waters, and expel the stars received into heaven as
the reward of adultery, that a concubine may not be received into your
pure waves.” The Gods of the sea granted her request. The daughter of Saturn
enters the liquid air in her graceful chariot, 68 with her variegated
peacocks; peacocks just as lately tinted, upon the killing of Argus, as
thou, garrulous raven, hadst been suddenly transformed into a bird
having black wings, whereas thou hadst been white before. For this
bird was formerly of a silver hue, with snow-white feathers, so that he
equalled the doves entirely without spot; nor would he give place to the
geese that were to save the Capitol by their watchful voice, nor to the
swan haunting the streams. His tongue was the cause of his disgrace; his
chattering tongue being the cause, that the color which was white is now
the reverse of white. There was no one more beauteous in all Hæmonia than Larissæan 69 Coronis.
At least, she pleased thee, Delphian God , as long as she
continued chaste, or was not the object of remark. But the bird of
Phœbus found out her infidelity; 70 and the inexorable informer winged
his way to his master, that he might disclose the hidden offence. Him
the prattling crow follows, with flapping wings, to make all inquiries
of him. And having heard the occasion of his journey, she says, “Thou
art going on a fruitless errand; do not despise the presages of my
voice.” 81 II. 550-564] 68 II. 550-567 EXPLANATION. Cicero (On the Nature of the Gods, Book iii.) tells us, that Lycaon had
a daughter who delighted in the chase, and that Jupiter, the second of
that name, the king of Arcadia, fell in love with her. This was the
ground on which she was said to have been a favorite of Diana. The story
of Calisto having been received into Heaven, and forming the
Constellation of the Bear, was perhaps grounded on the fact of Lycaon,
her father, having been the first known to take particular notice of
this Constellation. The story of the request of Juno, that Tethys will
not receive this new Constellation into the Ocean, is probably derived
from the circumstance, that the Bear, as well as the other stars within
the Arctic Circle, never sets. Possibly, Arcas, the son of Calisto, dying at a youthful age, may have
been the origin of the Constellation of the Lesser Bear. FABLE VIII. A virgin , the favorite of Apollo, of
the same name with Coronis, is changed into a crow, for a story which
she tells Minerva, concerning the basket in which Ericthonius was
enclosed. “ Consider what I was, and what I am,
and inquire into my deserts. Thou wilt find that my fidelity was my
ruin. For once upon a time, Pallas had enclosed Ericthonius, an
offspring born without a mother, in a basket made of Actæan twigs; and
had given it to keep to the three virgins born of the two-shaped 71 Cecrops, and had given them this injunction, that they should not
inquire into her secrets. I, being hidden among the light foliage,
was watching from a thick elm what they were doing. Two of them ,
Pandrosos and Herse, observe their charge without any treachery;
Aglauros alone calls her sisters cowards, and unties the knots with her
hand; but within they behold a child, and a dragon extended by him.
I told the Goddess what was done; for which such a return as this
is made to me, that I am said to have been banished from the protection
of Minerva, and am placed after the bird of the night. My punishment may
warn birds not to incur 82 II. 564-590 dangers, by their chattering. But I consider that she courted me
with no inclination of my own, nor asking for any such favors .
This thou mayst ask of Pallas thyself; 69 II. 567-590 although she is angry, she will not, with all her anger, deny this. For
Coroneus, one famous in the land of Phocis (I mention what is well
known) begot me: and so I was a virgin of royal birth, and was
courted by rich suitors ( so despise me not). My beauty was the
cause of my misfortune; for while I was passing with slow steps along
the sea-shore, on the surface of the sand, as I was wont to do ,
the God of the Ocean beheld me, and was inflamed; and when he had
consumed his time to no purpose, in entreating me with soft words, he
prepared to use violence, and followed me. I fled, and I
left the firm shore, and wearied myself in vain on the yielding sand.
Then I invoked both Gods and men; but my voice did not reach any mortal.
A virgin was moved for a virgin, and gave me assistance. I was
extending my arms toward heaven; when those arms began to grow
black with light feathers. I struggled to throw my garments from
off my shoulders, but they were feathers, and had taken deep root in my
skin. I tried to beat my naked breast with my hands, but I had now
neither hands nor naked breast. I ran; and the sand did not retard
my feet as before, and I was lifted up from the surface of the ground.
After that, being lifted up, I was carried through the air, and was
assigned, as a faultless companion, to Minerva. Yet what does this avail
me, if Nyctimene, made a bird for a horrid crime, has succeeded me in my
honor?” EXPLANATION. Ericthonius was fabled to be the son, or foster-child, of Athene, or
Minerva, perhaps because he was the son of the daughter of Cranaus, who
had the name of Athene, by a priest of Vulcan, which Divinity was said
to have been his progenitor. St. Augustine alleges that he was
exposed, and found in a temple dedicated to Minerva and Vulcan. His name
being composed of two words, ἔρις and χθὼν , signifying ‘contention,’ and ‘earth,’ Strabo
imagines that he was the son of Vulcan and the Earth. But it seems that
the real ground on which he was called by that name was, that he
disputed the right to the crown of Athens with Amphictyon, on the death
of Cranaus, the second king. Amphictyon prevailed, but Ericthonius
succeeded him. To hide his legs, which were deformed, he is said 83 II. 590-605 to have invented chariots; though that is not likely, as Egypt, from
which Greece had received many colonies, was acquainted with the use of
them from the earliest times. He is also said to have instituted the
festival of the Panathenæa, at Athens, whence, in process of time, it
was adopted by the whole of Greece. Hyginus tells us, that after his death he was received into heaven as
the 70 II. 590-611 constellation ‘Auriga,’ or ‘the Charioteer;’ and he further informs us,
that the deformity of his legs gave occasion to the saying, that he was
half man and half a serpent. Apollodorus says that he was born in
Attica; that he was the son of Cranaë, the daughter of Attis; and that
he dethroned Amphictyon, and became the fourth king of Athens. FABLE IX. Nyctimene having entertained a criminal
passion for her father, Nycteus, the Gods, to punish her incest,
transform her into an owl. Apollo pierces the breast of Coronis with an
arrow, on the raven informing him of the infidelity of his mistress. “ Has not the thing, which is very
well known throughout the whole of Lesbos, 72 been heard of by
thee, that Nyctimene defiled the bed of her father? She is a bird
indeed; but being conscious of her crime, she avoids the human gaze and the light, and conceals her shame in the darkness; and by all the birds she is expelled entirely from the sky.” The raven says to him, saying such things, “May this, thy calling of
me back, prove a mischief to thee, I pray; I despise the
worthless omen.” Nor does he drop his intended journey; and he tells his
master, that he has seen Coronis lying down with a youth of Hæmonia. On
hearing the crime of his mistress, his laurel fell down; and at the same
moment his usual looks, his plectrum, 73 and his color, forsook the God.
And as his mind was now burning with swelling rage, he took up
his wonted arms, and levelled his bow bent from the extremities, and
pierced, with an unerring shaft, that bosom, that had been so oft
pressed to his 84 II. 605-632 own breast. Wounded, she uttered a groan, and, drawing the steel from
out of the wound, she bathed her white limbs with purple blood; and she
said, “I might justly , Phœbus, have been punished by thee,
but still I might have first brought forth; now we two shall die
in one.” Thus far she spoke ; and she poured forth her life,
together with her blood. A deadly coldness took possession of her
body deprived of life. 71 II. 611-632 The lover, too late, alas! repents of his cruel vengeance, and blames
himself that he listened to the bird, and that he was so
infuriated. He hates the bird, through which he was forced to know of
the crime and the cause of his sorrow; he hates, too, the string, the
bow, and his hand; and together with his hand, those rash
weapons, the arrows. He cherishes her fallen to the ground, and by late
resources endeavors to conquer her destiny; and in vain he practices his
physical arts. When he found that these attempts were made in vain, and that the
funeral pile was being prepared, and that her limbs were about to be
burnt in the closing flames, then, in truth, he gave utterance to sighs
fetched from the bottom of his heart (for it is not allowed the
celestial features to be bathed with tears). No otherwise than, as when
an axe, poised from the right ear of the butcher , dashes to
pieces, with a clean stroke, the hollow temples of the sucking calf,
while the dam looks on. Yet after Phœbus had poured the unavailing
perfumes on her breast, when he had given the last embrace and
had performed the due obsequies prematurely hastened, he did not suffer
his own offspring to sink into the same ashes; but he snatched the child
from the flames and from the womb of his mother, and carried him into the cave
of the two-formed Chiron. And he forbade the raven, expecting for
himself the reward of his tongue that told no untruth, to perch any
longer among the white birds. EXPLANATION. History does not afford us the least insight into the foundation of the
story of Coronis transformed into a crow, for making too faithful a
report, nor that of the raven changed from white to black, 85 II. 632-651 for talking too much. If they are based upon some events which really
happened, we must be content to acknowledge that these Fables refer to
the history of two persons entirely unknown to us, and who, perhaps,
lived as far back as the time of the daughters of Cecrops, to whom the
story seems to bear some relation. Coronis being the name of a crow as
well as of a Nymph, Lucian and other writers have fabled that her son,
Æsculapius, was produced from the egg of that bird, and was born in the
shape of a serpent, under which form he was very generally
worshipped. 72 II. 632-658 FABLE X. Ocyrrhoë , the daughter of the Centaur
Chiron, attempting to predict future events, tells her father the fate
of the child Æsculapius, on which the Gods transform her into a
mare. In the meantime the half-beast Chiron was proud of a pupil of Divine origin, and rejoiced in the
honor annexed to the responsibility. Behold! the daughter of the Centaur
comes, having her shoulders covered with her yellow hair; whom once the
nymph Chariclo, 74 having borne her on the banks of a rapid stream,
called Ocyrrhoë. She was not contented to learn her father’s arts only; but she sang the secrets of the Fates. Therefore, when she
had conceived in her mind the prophetic transports, and grew warm with
the God, whom she held confined within her breast, she beheld the
infant, and she said, “Grow on, child, the giver of health to the whole
world; the bodies of mortals shall often owe their own existence to thee. To thee will it be allowed to restore life when taken away; and
daring to do that once against the will of the Gods, thou wilt be
hindered by the bolts of thy grandsire from being able any more to grant
that boon . And from a God thou shalt become a lifeless carcase;
and a God again , who lately wast a carcase; and twice shalt thou
renew thy destiny. Thou likewise, dear father, now immortal, and
produced at thy nativity, on the condition of enduring for ever, wilt
then wish that thou couldst die, when thou shalt be 86 II. 652-675 tormented on receiving the blood of a baneful serpent 75 in thy wounded
limbs; and the Gods shall make thee from an immortal being ,
subject to death, and the three Goddesses 76 shall cut thy
threads.” Something still remained in addition to what she had said. She heaved
a sigh from the bottom of her breast, and the tears bursting forth,
trickled down her cheeks, and thus she said: “The Fates prevent me, and
I am forbidden to say any more, 73 II. 658-682 and the use of my voice is precluded. My arts, which have brought the
wrath of a Divinity upon me, were not of so much value; I wish that
I had not been acquainted with the future. Now the human shape seems to
be withdrawing from me; now grass pleases me for my food; now I
have a desire to range over the extended plains; I am turned into a
mare, and into a shape kindred to that of my father . But yet, why
entirely? For my father partakes of both forms.” As she was uttering such words as these, the last part of her
complaint was but little understood; and her words were confused. And
presently neither were they words indeed, nor did it appear to be
the voice of a mare, but of one imitating a mare. And in a little time
she uttered perfect neighing, and stretched her arms upon the grass.
Then did her fingers grow together, and a smooth hoof united five nails
in one continued piece of horn. The length of her face and of her neck
increased; the greatest part of her long hair became a tail. And as the
hairs lay scattered about her neck, they were transformed into a mane lying upon the right side; at once both her voice and her shape
were changed. And this wondrous change gave her the new name of Enippe . 87 II. 676-693 FABLE XI. Mercury , having stolen the oxen of
Apollo, and Battus having perceived the theft, he engages him, by a
present, to keep the matter secret. Mistrusting, however, his fidelity,
he assumes another shape, and tempting him with presents, he succeeds in
corrupting him. To punish his treachery, the God changes him into a
touchstone. The Philyrean 77 hero wept, and in
vain, God of Delphi, implored thy assistance; but neither couldst
thou reverse the orders of great Jupiter, nor, if thou couldst have
reversed them wast thou then present; for then thou wast dwelling
in Elis and the Messenian 78 fields. This was the time when a
shepherd’s skin garment was covering thee, and a stick cut out of the
wood was the burden of thy left hand, and of the other, 74 II. 682-707 a pipe unequal with its seven reeds. And while love is thy concern,
while thy pipe is soothing thee, some cows are said to have strayed
unobserved into the plains of Pylos. 79 The son of Maia the daughter of
Atlas, observes them, and with his usual skill hides them, driven
off, in the woods. Nobody but an old man, well-known in that country,
had noticed the theft: all the neighborhood called him Battus. He was
keeping the forests and the grassy pastures, and the set of fine-bred
mares of the rich Neleus. 80 Mercury was afraid of him, and took him aside with a gentle
hand, and said to him, “Come, stranger, whoever thou art, if, perchance
any one should ask after these herds, deny that thou hast seen them;
and, lest 88 II. 694-707 no requital be paid thee for so doing, take a handsome cow as thy
reward;” and thereupon he gave him one . On receiving it,
the stranger returned this answer: “Thou mayst go in safety. May that
stone first make mention of thy theft;” and he pointed to a stone. The
son of Jupiter feigned to go away. But soon he returned, and
changing his form, together with his voice, he said, “Countryman, if
thou hast seen any cows pass along this way, give me thy help, and break
silence about the theft; a female, coupled together with its bull
shall be presented thee as a reward.” But the old man, 81 after his
reward was thus doubled, said, “They will be beneath those
hills;” and beneath those hills they really were. The son of Atlas laughed
and said, “Dost thou, treacherous man, betray me to my own self? Dost
betray me to myself?” and then he turned his perjured breast into
a hard stone, which even now is called the “Touchstone;” 82 and this old
disgrace is attached to the stone that really deserves it
not. 75 II. 708-718 EXPLANATION. The Centaurs, fabulous monsters, half men and half horses, were perhaps
the first horsemen in Thessaly and its neighborhood. It is also probable
that Chiron, who was one of these, acquired great fame by the knowledge
he had acquired at a time and in a country where learning was little
cultivated. The ancients regarded him as the first promulgator of the
utility of medicines, in which he was said to have instructed his pupil
Æsculapius. He was also considered to be an excellent musician and a
good astronomer, as we learn from Homer, Diodorus Siculus, and other
authors. Most of the heroes of that age, and among them Hercules and
Jason, studied under him. Very probably, the only foundation for the
story of the transformation of Ocyrrhoë, was the skill and address
which, under her father’s instruction, she acquired in riding and 89 II. 708-726 the management of horses. For if, as it seems really was the case, the
horsemen of that age were taken for monsters, half men and half horses,
it is not surprising to find the story that the daughter of a Centaur
was transformed into a mare. Chiron is generally supposed to have marked out the Constellations, for
the purpose of directing the Argonauts in their voyage for the recovery
of the Golden Fleece. FABLE XII. Mercury , falling in love with Herse,
the daughter of Cecrops, endeavors to engage Aglauros in his interest,
and by her means, to obtain access to her sister. She refuses to assist
him, unless he promises to present her with a large sum of money. Hence , the bearer of the caduceus
raised himself upon equal wings; and as he flew, he looked down upon the
fields of Munychia, 83 and the land pleasing to Minerva, and the groves of
the well-planted Lycæus. On that day, by chance, the chaste virgins
were, in their purity, carrying the sacred offerings in baskets crowned
with flowers, upon their heads to the joyful citadel of Pallas. The
winged God beholds them returning thence; and he does not shape his
course directly forward, but wheels round in the same circle. As
that bird swiftest in speed, the kite, on espying the entrails, while he
is afraid, and the priests stand in numbers around the sacrifice, wings
his flight in circles, and yet ventures not to go far away, 76 II. 719-736 and greedily hovers around the object of his hopes with waving
wings, so does the active Cyllenian God bend his course over the
Actæan towers, and circles round in the same air. As much as Lucifer
shines more brightly than the other stars, and as much as the golden
Phœbe shines more brightly than thee, O Lucifer, so much
superior was Herse, as she went, to all the other virgins, and
was the ornament of the solemnity and of her companions. The son of
Jupiter was astonished at her beauty; and as he hung in the air, he
burned no otherwise than as when the 90 II. 727-741 Balearic 84 sling throws forth the plummet of lead; it flies and
becomes red hot in its course, and finds beneath the clouds the fires
which it had not before . He alters his course, and, having left heaven, goes a different way;
nor does he disguise himself; so great is his confidence in his beauty.
This, though it is every way complete, still he improves by care,
and smooths his hair and adjusts his mantle, 85 that it may hang
properly, so that the fringe and all the gold may be seen; and
minds that his long smooth wand, with which he induces and drives
away sleep, is in his 77 II. 736-764 right hand, and that his wings 86 shine upon his beauteous feet. A private part of the house had three bed-chambers, adorned with
ivory and with tortoiseshell, of which thou, Pandrosos, hadst the
right-hand one, Aglauros the left-hand, and Herse had the one in the
middle. She that occupied the left-hand one was the first to remark
Mercury approaching, and she ventured to ask 91 II. 741-764 the name of the God, and the occasion of his coming. To her thus
answered the grandson of Atlas and of Pleione: “I am he who carries
the commands of my father through the air. Jupiter himself is my father.
Nor will I invent pretences; do thou only be willing to be attached to
thy sister, and to be called the aunt of my offspring. Herse is the
cause of my coming; I pray thee to favor one in love.” Aglauros
looks upon him with the same eyes with which she had lately looked upon
the hidden mysteries of the yellow-haired Minerva, and demands for her
agency gold of great weight; and , in the meantime, obliges him to
go out of the house. The warlike Goddess turned upon her the orbs of her
stern eyes, and drew a sigh from the bottom of her heart , with so
great a motion, that she heaved both her breast and the Ægis placed
before her valiant breast. It occurred to her that she had laid
open her secrets with a profane hand, at the time when she beheld
progeny created for the God who inhabits Lemnos, 87 without a
mother, and contrary to the assigned laws; and that she could now
be agreeable both to the God and to the sister of Aglauros , and
that she would be enriched by taking the gold, which she, in her
avarice, had demanded. Forthwith she repairs to the abode of Envy,
hideous with black gore. Her abode is concealed in the lowest recesses
of a cave, wanting sun, and not pervious to any wind, dismal and
filled with benumbing cold; and which is ever without fire, and ever
abounding with darkness. EXPLANATION. Cicero tells us, that there were several persons in ancient times named
Mercury. The probability is, that one of them fell in love with Herse,
one of the daughters of Cecrops, king of Athens; and that Aglauros
becoming jealous of her, this tradition was built upon facts of so
ordinary a nature. 92 II. 765-789 78 II. 765-791 FABLE XIII. Pallas commands Envy to make Aglauros
jealous of her sister Herse. Envy obeys the request of the Goddess; and
Aglauros, stung with that passion, continues obstinate in opposing
Mercury’s passage to her sister’s apartment ,
for which the God changes her into a statue. When the female warrior, to be
dreaded in battle, came hither, she stood before the abode (for she did
not consider it lawful to go under the roof), and she struck the
door-posts with the end of the spear. The doors, being shaken, flew
open; she sees Envy within, eating the flesh of vipers, the nutriment of
her own bad propensities; and when she sees her, she turns away her
eyes. But the other rises sluggishly from the ground, and leaves the
bodies of the serpents half devoured, and stalks along with sullen pace.
And when she sees the Goddess graced with beauty and with splendid arms, she groans, and fetches a deep sigh at her
appearance. A paleness rests on her face, and leanness in
all her body; she never looks direct on you; her teeth are black with
rust; her breast is green with gall; her tongue is dripping with venom.
Smiles there are none, except such as the sight of grief has excited.
Nor does she enjoy sleep, being kept awake with watchful cares; but sees
with sorrow the successes of men, and pines away at seeing them. She
both torments and is tormented at the same moment, and is ever her own punishment. Yet, though Tritonia 88 hated her, she spoke
to her briefly in such words as these: “Infect one of the daughters of
Cecrops with thy poison; there is occasion so to do ; Aglauros is
she.” Saying no more, she departed, and spurned the ground with her spear
impressed on it. She, beholding the Goddess as she departed, with a look
askance, uttered a few murmurs, and grieved at the success of Minerva;
and took her staff, which wreaths of thorns entirely 93 II. 790-822 surrounded; and veiled in black clouds, wherever she goes she tramples
down the blooming 79 II. 791-829 fields, and burns up the grass, and crops the tops of the
flowers . With her breath, too, she pollutes both nations and cities,
and houses; and at last she descries the Tritonian 89 citadel,
flourishing in arts and riches, and cheerful peace. Hardly does she
restrain her tears, because she sees nothing to weep at. But after she
has entered the chamber of the daughter of Cecrops, she executes her
orders; and touches her breast with her hand stained with rust, and
fills her heart with jagged thorns. She breathes into her as well the
noxious venom, and spreads the poison black as pitch throughout her
bones, and lodges it in the midst of her lungs. And that these causes of mischief may not wander through too wide a
space, she places her sister before her eyes, and the fortunate marriage
of that sister, and the God under his beauteous appearance, and
aggravates each particular. By this, the daughter of Cecrops being
irritated, is gnawed by a secret grief, and groans, tormented by night,
tormented by day, and wastes away in extreme wretchedness, with a slow
consumption, as ice smitten upon by a sun often clouded. She burns at
the good fortune of the happy Herse, no otherwise than as when fire is
placed beneath thorny reeds, which do not send forth flames, and burn
with a gentle heat. Often does she wish to die, that she may not be a
witness to any such thing; often, to tell the matters, as criminal, to
her severe father. At last, she sat herself down in the front of the
threshold, in order to exclude the God when he came; to whom, as he
proffered blandishments and entreaties, and words of extreme kindness,
she said, “Cease all this ; I shall not remove myself hence,
until thou art repulsed.” “Let us stand to that agreement,” says the
active Cyllenian God ; and he opens the carved door with his wand.
But in her, as she endeavors to arise, the parts which we bend in
sitting cannot be moved, through their numbing weight. She, indeed,
struggles to raise herself, with her body, 94 II. 823-840 upright; but the joints of her knees are stiff, and a chill runs through
her nails, and her veins are pallid, through the loss of blood. And as the disease of an incurable cancer is wont to spread in
all directions, and to add the uninjured parts to the tainted; so, by
degrees, did a deadly chill enter her breast, and stop the passages of
life, and her respiration. She did not endeavor 80 II. 829-849 to speak; but if she had endeavored, she had no passage for her voice.
Stone had now possession of her neck; her face was grown hard, and she
sat, a bloodless statue. Nor was the stone white; her mind had
stained it. EXPLANATION. Pausanias, in his Attica, somewhat varies this story, and says that the
daughters of Cecrops, running mad, threw themselves from the top of a
tower. It is very probable that on the introduction of the worship of
Pallas, or Minerva, into Attica, these daughters of Cecrops may have
hesitated to encourage the innovation, and the story was promulgated
that the Goddess had in that manner punished their impiety. This seems
the more likely, from the fact mentioned by Pausanias that Pandrosos,
the third daughter of Cecrops, had, after her death, a temple built
in honor of her, near that of Minerva, because she had continued
faithful to that Goddess, and had not disobeyed her, as her sisters had
done. The reputation and good fame of Herse and Aglauros had, however,
been restored by the time of Herodotus, since he informs us that they
both had their temples at Athens. FABLE XIV. Jupiter assumes the shape of a Bull,
and carrying off Europa, swims with her on his back to the isle of
Crete. When the grandson of Atlas had
inflicted this punishment upon her words and her profane disposition, he
left the lands named after Pallas, and entered the skies with his waving
wings. His father calls him on one side; and, not owning the cause of
his love, he says, “My son, the trusty minister of my commands, banish
delay, and swiftly descend with thy usual speed, and repair to the
region which looks towards thy Constellation mother on the left
side, (the natives call it 95 II. 840-870 Sidonis 90 by name) and drive towards the sea-shore, the herd
belonging to the king, which thou seest feeding
afar upon the grass of the mountain.” Thus he spoke; and already were the bullocks, driven from the
mountain, making for the shore named, where the daughter of the great
king, attended by Tyrian virgins, was wont to amuse herself. Majesty and
love but ill accord, nor can they continue in the same abode. The father
and the ruler of the Gods, whose right hand is armed with the
three-forked flames, 81 II. 849-875 who shakes the world with his nod, laying aside the dignity of empire,
assumes the appearance of a bull; and mixing with the oxen, he lows,
and, in all his beauty, walks about upon the shooting grass. For his
color is that of snow, which neither the soles of hard feet have trodden
upon, nor the watery South wind melted. His neck swells with muscles;
dewlaps hang from between his shoulders. His horns are small
indeed, but such as you might maintain were made with the hand, and more
transparent than a bright gem. There is nothing threatening in his
forehead; nor is his eye formidable; his countenance expresses
peace. The daughter of Agenor is surprised that he is so beautiful, and that
he threatens no attack; but although so gentle, she is at first afraid
to touch him. By and by she approaches him, and holds out flowers to his
white mouth. The lover rejoices, and till his hoped-for pleasure comes,
he gives kisses to her hands; scarcely, oh, scarcely, does he defer the
rest. And now he plays with her, and skips upon the green grass; and now he lays his snow-white side upon the yellow sand. And,
her fear now removed by degrees, at one moment he gives his
breast to be patted by the hand of the virgin; at another, his horns to
be wreathed with new-made garlands. The virgin of royal birth even
ventured to sit down upon the back of the bull, not knowing upon whom
she was pressing. Then the God, by degrees moving from the land,
and from the dry shore, places 96 II. 870-875 the fictitious hoofs of his feet in the waves near the brink. Then he
goes still further, and carries his prize over the expanse of the midst
of the ocean. She is affrighted, and, borne off, looks back on the shore
she has left; and with her right hand she grasps his horn, while the other is placed on his back; her waving garments are ruffled by the
breeze. EXPLANATION. This Fable depicts one of the most famous events in the ancient
Mythology. As we have already remarked, it is supposed that there were
several persons of the name of Zeus, or Jupiter; though there is great
difficulty in assigning to each individual his own peculiar adventures.
Vossius refers the adventure of Niobe, the daughter of Phoroneus, to
Jupiter Apis, the king of Argos, who reigned about B.C. 1770; and that of Danaë to Jupiter Prœtus, who
lived about 1350 years before the Christian era. It was Jupiter
Tantalus, according to him, that carried off Ganymede; and it was
Jupiter, the father of Hercules, that deceived Leda. He says 72 that the subject of the present Fable was Jupiter Asterius, who reigned
about B.C. 1400. Diodorus Siculus
tells us that he was the son of Teutamus, who, having married the
daughter of Creteus, went with some Pelasgians to settle in the island
of Crete, of which he was the first king. We may then conclude, that
Jupiter Asterius, having heard of the beauty of Europa, the daughter of
Agenor, King of Tyre, fitted out a ship, for the purpose of carrying her
off by force. This is the less improbable, as we learn from Herodotus,
that the custom of carrying those away by force, who could not be
obtained by fair means, was very common in these rude ages. The ship in which Asterius made his voyage, had, very probably, the form
of a bull for its figure-head; which, in time, occasioned those who
related the adventure, to say, that Jupiter concealed himself under the
shape of that animal, to carry off his mistress. Palæphatus and Tzetzes suggest , that the story took its rise from the name of
the general of Asterius, who was called Taurus, which is also the Greek
name for a bull. Bochart has an ingenious suggestion, based upon
etymological grounds. He thinks that the twofold meaning of the word
‘Alpha,’ or ‘Ilpha,’ which, in the Phœnician dialect, meant either a
ship or a bull, gave occasion to the fable; and that the Greeks, on
reading the annals of the Phœnicians, by mistake, took the word in the
latter sense. Europa was honored as a Divinity after her death, and a festival was
instituted in her memory, which Hesychius calls ‘Hellotia,’ from Ἑλλωτὶς , the name she received after her death. 1. Ægeon. ]—Ver. 10. Homer makes him to be the same with
Briareus. According to another account, which Ovid here follows, he was
a sea God, the son of Oceanus and Terra. 2. Doris. ]—Ver. 11. She was the daughter of Oceanus, the wife
of Nereus, and the mother of the fifty Nereids. 3. Tethys. ]—Ver. 69. She was the daughter of Cœlus and Terra,
and the wife of Oceanus. Her name is here used to signify the ocean
itself. 4. Are carried round. ]—Ver. 70. Clarke thus renders this
line,—“Add, too, that the heaven was whisked round with a
continual rolling.” 5. Wild beasts. ]—Ver. 78. The signs of the Zodiac. 6. Hæmonian. ]—Ver. 81. Or Thessalian. He here alludes to the
Thessalian Chiron, the Centaur, who, according to Ovid and other
writers, was placed in the Zodiac as the Constellation Sagittarius:
while others say that Crotus, or Croto, the son of Eupheme, the nurse of
the Muses, was thus honored. 7. Through the five direct circles. ]—Ver. 129. There is some
obscurity in this passage, arising from the mode of expression. Phœbus
here counsels Phaëton what track to follow, and tells him to pursue his
way by an oblique path, and not directly in the plane of the equator.
This last is what he calls ‘directos via quinque per arcus.’ These five
arcs, or circles, are the five parallel circles by which astronomers
distinguish the heavens, namely, the two polar circles, the two tropics,
and the equinoctial. The latter runs exactly in the middle, between the
other two circles, so that the expression must be understood to mean,
‘pursue not your way directly through that circle which is the
middlemost of the five, but observe the track that cuts it
obliquely.’ 8. The chariot give bounds. ]—Ver. 165-6. Clarke thus renders
these lines.—‘Thus does the chariot give jumps into the air
without its usual weight, and is kicked up on high, and is like one
empty.’ 9. They say, too. ]—Ver. 176-7. The following is Clarke’s
translation of these two lines,—‘They say, too, that you, Boötes,
scowered off in a mighty bustle, although you were but slow, and thy
cart hindered thee.’ 10. Athos. ]—Ver. 217. Athos (now Monte Santo) was a mountain of
Macedonia, so lofty that its shadow was said to extend even to the Isle
of Lemnos, which was eighty-seven miles distant. 11. Taurus. ]—Ver. 217. This was an immense mountain range which
ran through the middle of Cilicia, in Asia Minor. 12. Tmolus. ]—Ver. 217. Tmolus (now Bozdaz) was a mountain of
Lydia, famed for its wines and saffron. Pactolus, a stream with
sands reputed to be golden, took its rise there. 13. Œta. ]—Ver. 217. This was a mountain chain, which divided Thessaly from Doris and Phocis; famed for the death
of Hercules on one of its ridges. 14. Ida. ]—Ver. 218. There were two mountains of the name of
Ide, or Ida; one in Crete, the other near Troy. The latter is here
referred to, as being famed for its springs. 15. Helicon. ]—Ver. 219. This was a mountain of Bœotia, sacred
to the Virgin Muses. 16. Hæmus . —Ver. 219. This, which is now called the
Balkan range, was a lofty chain of mountains running through Thrace.
Orpheus, the son of Œagrus and Calliope, was there torn in pieces by the
Mænades, or Bacchanalian women, whence the mountain obtained the epithet
of ‘Œagrian.’ 17. Ætna. ]—Ver. 220. This is the volcanic mountain of Sicily;
the flames caused by the fall of Phaëton, added to its own, caused them
to be redoubled. 18. Eryx. ]—Ver. 221. This was a mountain of Sicily, now called San
Juliano. On it, a magnificent temple was erected, in honor of
Venus. 19. Cynthus. ]—Ver. 221. This was a mountain of Delos, on which
Apollo and Diana were said to have been born. 20. Rhodope. ]—Ver. 222. It was a high mountain, capped with
perpetual snows, in the northern part of Thrace. 21. Mimas. ]—Ver. 222. A mountain of Ionia, near the Ionian
Sea. It was of very great height; whence Homer calls it ὑψίκρημνος . 22. Dindyma. ]—Ver. 223. This was a mountain of Phrygia, near
Troy, sacred to Cybele, the mother of the Gods. 23. Mycale. ]—Ver. 223. A mountain of Caria, opposite to
the Isle of Samos. 24. Cithæron . ]—Ver. 223. This was a mountain of
Bœotia, famous for the orgies of Bacchus, there celebrated. In its
neighborhood, Pentheus was torn to pieces by the Mænades, for slighting
the worship of Bacchus. 25. Caucasus. ]—Ver. 224. This was a mountain chain in Asia,
between the Euxine and Caspian Seas. 26. Alps. ]—Ver. 226. This mountain range divides France from
Italy. 27. Apennines. ]—Ver. 226. This range of mountains runs down the
centre of Italy. 28. Their black hue. ]—Ver. 235. The notion that the blackness
of the African tribes was produced by the heat of the sun, is borrowed
by the Poet from Hesiod. Hyginus, too, says, ‘the Indians, because, by
the proximity of the fire, their blood was turned black by the heat
thereof, became of black appearance themselves.’ Notwithstanding the
learned and minute investigations of physiologists on the subject, this
question is still involved in considerable obscurity. 29. Libya. ]—Ver. 237. This was a region between Mauritania and
Cyrene. The Greek writers, however, often use the word to signify the
whole of Africa. Servius gives a trifling derivation for the name, in
saying that Libya was so called, because λείπει ὁ ὕετος , ‘it is without rain.’ 30. Dirce. ]—Ver. 239. Dirce was a celebrated fountain of
Bœotia, into which it was said that Dirce, the wife of Lycus, king of
Thebes, was transformed. 31. Amymone. ]—Ver. 240. It was a fountain of Argos, near Lerna,
into which the Nymph, Amymone, the daughter of Lycus, king of the
Argives, was said to have been transformed. 32. Ephyre. ]—Ver. 240. It was the most ancient name of Corinth,
in the citadel of which, or the Acrocorinthus, was the spring Pyrene, of
extreme brightness and purity and sacred to the Muses. 33. Tanais. ]—Ver. 242. This river, now the Don, after a long
winding course, discharges itself into the ‘Palus Mæotis,’ now the sea
of ‘Azof.’ 34. Caïcus. ]—Ver. 243. This is a river of Mysia, here called
‘Teuthrantian,’ from Mount Teuthras, in its vicinity. 35. Ismenus. ]—Ver. 244. Ismenus was a river of Bœotia, that
flowed past Thebes into the Euripus. 36. Erymanthus. ]—Ver. 245. This was a river of Arcadia, which,
rising in a mountain of that name, fell into the Alpheus. 37. Xanthus. ]—Ver. 245. This was a river of Troy; here spoken
of as destined to behold flames a second time, in the conflagration of
that city. 38. Lycormas. ]—Ver. 245. This was a rapid river of Ætolia,
which was afterwards known by the name of Evenus. 39. Mæander. ]—Ver. 246. This was a river of Phrygia, flowing
between Lydia and Caria; it was said to have 600 windings in its
course. 40. Melas. ]—Ver. 247. This name was given to many rivers of
Thrace, Thessaly, and Asia, on account of the darkness of the color of
their waters; the name was derived from the Greek word μέλας , ‘black.’ 41. Tænarian Eurotas. ]—Ver. 247. The Eurotas was a river of
Laconia, which flowed under the walls of the city of Sparta, and
discharged itself into the sea near the promontory of Tænarus, now
called Cape Matapan . The Eurotas is now called ‘Basilipotamo,’ or
‘king of streams.’ 42. Orontes. ]—Ver. 248. The Orontes was a river of Asia Minor,
which flowed near Antioch. 43. Thermodon. ]—Ver. 249. This was a river of Cappadocia, near
which the Amazons were said to dwell. 44. Ganges. ]—Ver. 249. This is one of the largest rivers in
Asia, and discharges itself into the Persian Gulf; and not, as Gierig
says, in his note on this passage, in the Red Sea. 45. Phasis. ]—Ver. 249. This was a river of Colchis, falling
into the Euxine Sea. 46. Ister. ]—Ver. 249. The Danube had that name from its source
to the confines of Germany; and thence, in its course through Scythia to
the sea, it was called by the name of ‘Ister.’ 47. Alpheus. ]—Ver. 250. It was a river of Arcadia, in
Peloponnesus. 48. Tagus. ]—Ver. 251. This was a river of Spain, which was said
to bring down from the mountains great quantities of golden sand. The
Poet here feigns this to be melted by the heat of the sun, and in that
manner to be carried along by the current of the river. 49. Mæonian. ]—Ver. 252. Mæonia was so called from the river
Mæon, and was another name of Lydia. The Caÿster, famous for its swans,
flowed through Lydia. 50. Strymon. ]—Ver. 257. The Hebrus and the Strymon were rivers
of Thrace. Ismarus was a mountain of that country, famous for its
vines. 51. Hesperian. ]—Ver. 258. Hesperia, or ‘the western country,’
was a general name of not only Spain and Gaul, but even Italy. The Rhine
is a river of France and Germany, the Rhone of France. The Padus, or Po,
and the Tiber, are rivers of Italy. 52. Cyclades. ]—Ver. 264. The Cyclades were a cluster of islands
in the Ægean Sea, surrounding Delos as though with a circle, whence
their name. 53. Her all-productive face. ]—Ver. 275. The earth was similarly
called by the Greeks παμμήτωρ , ‘the mother of all things.’ So Virgil calls
it ‘omniparens.’ 54. Atlas. ]—Ver. 296. This was a mountain of Mauritania, which,
by reason of its height, was said to support the heavens. 55. We are thrown. ]—Ver. 299. Clarke translates, ‘In chaos
antiquum confundimur,’ ‘We are then jumbled into the old chaos
again.’ 56. The Hesperian Naiads. ]—Ver. 325. These were the Naiads of
Italy. They were by name Phaëthusa, Lampetie, and Phœbe. 57. Passed without the sun. ]—Ver. 331. There is, perhaps, in
this line some faint reference to a tradition of the sun having, in the
language of Scripture, ‘stood still upon Gibeon, in his course, by the
command of Joshua, when dispensing the divine vengeance upon the
Amorites,’ Joshua, x. 13. Or of the time when ‘the shadow returned
ten degrees backward’, by the sun-dial of Ahaz, 2 Kings, xx.11 . 58. Sthenelus. ]—Ver. 367. He was a king of Liguria.
Commentators have justly remarked that it was not very likely that a
king of Liguria should be related to Clymene, a queen of the
Ethiopians, as Ovid, in the next line, says was the case. This story was
probably invented by some writer, who fancied that there were two
persons of the name of Phaëton; one the subject of eastern tradition,
and the other a personage of the Latin mythology. 59. The Ligurians. ]—Ver. 370. These were a people situate on
the eastern side of Etruria, between the rivers Var and Macra. The
Grecian writers were in the habit of styling the whole of the north of
Italy Liguria. 60. Trivia. ]—Ver. 416. This was an epithet of Diana, as
presiding over and worshipped in the places where three roads met, which
were called ‘trivia.’ Being known as Diana on earth, the Moon in the
heavens, and Proserpine in the infernal regions, she was represented at
these places with three faces; those of a horse, a dog, and a
female; the latter being in the middle. 61. Dictynna. ]—Ver. 441. Diana was so called from the Greek
word δικτὺς , ‘a net,’
which was used by her for the purposes of hunting. 62. There was no deceit. ]—Ver. 446. Clarke translates ‘sensit
abesse dolos,’ ‘she was convinced there was no roguery in the case.’ 63. She of Parrhasia. ]—Ver. 460. Calisto is so called from
Parrhasia, a region of Arcadia. Parrhasius was the name of a
mountain, a grove, and a city of that country and was derived from
the name of Parrhasus, a son of Lycaon. 64. Thou, mischievous one. ]—Ver. 475. Clarke, rather too
familiarly, renders ‘importuna,’ ‘plaguy baggage.’ 65. In front by the hair. ]—Ver. 476. ‘Adversâ prensis a fronte
capillis,’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘seizing her fore-top.’ Had he been
describing the combats of two fish-wives, such a version would have
been, perhaps, more appropriate than in the present instance. 66. With black hair. ]—Ver. 478. To the explanation given at the
end of the story, we may here add the curious one offered by Palæphatus.
He says that Calisto was a huntress who entered the den of a bear, by
which she was devoured; and that the bear coming out, and Calisto being
no more seen, it was reported that she had been transformed into a
bear. 67. Erymanthian forests. ]—Ver. 499. Erymanthus was a mountain
of Arcadia, which was afterwards famous for the slaughter there, by
Hercules, of the wild boar, which made it his haunt. 68. Graceful chariot. ]—Ver. 531. Clarke translates ‘habili
curru,’ ‘her neat chariot.’ 69. Larissæan. ]—Ver. 542. Larissa was the chief city of
Thessaly, and was situate on the river Peneus. 70. Her infidelity. ]—Ver. 545. ‘Sed ales sensit adulterium
Phœbeius,’ is translated by Clarke, ‘but the Phœban bird found out her
pranks.’ 71. Two-shaped. ]—Ver. 555. Cecrops is here so called, and in
the Greek, διφυὴς from
the fact of his having been born in Egypt, and having settled in Greece,
and was thus to be reckoned both as an Egyptian, and in the number of
the Greeks. 72. Lesbos. ]—Ver. 591. This was an island in the Ægean sea,
lying to the south of Troy. 73. Plectrum. ]—Ver. 601. This was a little rod, or staff, with
which the player used to strike the strings of the lyre, or cithara, on
which he was playing. 74. Chariclo. ]—Ver. 636. She was the daughter of Apollo, or of
Oceanus, but is supposed not to have been the same person that is
mentioned by Apollodorus as the mother of the prophet Tiresias. 75. A baneful serpent. ]—Ver. 652. This happened when one of the
arrows of Hercules, dipped in the poison of the Lernæan Hydra, pierced
the foot of Chiron while he was examining it. 76. The three Goddesses. ]—Ver. 654. Namely, Clotho, Lachesis,
and Atropos, the ‘Parcæ,’ or ‘Destinies.’ 77. Philyrean. ]—Ver. 676. Chiron was the son of Philyra, by
Saturn. 78. Messenian. ]—Ver. 679. Elis and Messenia were countries of
Peloponnesus; the former was on the northwest, and the latter on the
southwest side of it. 79. Plains of Pylos. ]—Ver. 684. There were three cities named
Pylos in Peloponnesus. One was in Elis, another in Messenia, and the
third was situate between the other two. The latter is supposed to have
been the native place of Nestor, though they all laid claim to that
honor. 80. Neleus. ]—Ver. 689. He was the king of Pylos, and the father
of Nestor. 81. The old man. ]—Ver. 702. Clarke quaintly translates ‘at
senior,’ ‘but then the old blade.’ 82. The ‘Touchstone.’ ]—Ver. 706. It is a matter of doubt among
commentators whether ‘index’ here means a general term for the
touchstone, by which metals are tested; or whether it means that Battus
was changed into one individual stone, which afterwards was called
‘index.’ Lactantius, by his words, seems to imply that the latter was
the case. He says, ‘He changed him into a stone, which, from this
circumstance, is called “index” about Pylos.’ ‘Index’ was a name of
infamy, corresponding with the Greek word συκοφάντης , and with our term ‘spy.’ 83. Munychia. ]—Ver. 709. Munychia was the name of a promontory
and harbor of Attica, between the Piræus and the promontory of ‘Sunium.’
The spot was so called from Munychius, who there built a temple in honor
of Diana. 84. Balearic. ]—Ver. 727. The Baleares were the islands of
Majorca, Minorca, and Iviza, in the Mediterranean, near the coast of
Spain. The natives of these islands were famous for their skill in the
use of the sling. That weapon does not appear to have been used in the
earliest times among the Greeks, as Homer does not mention it; it had,
however, been introduced by the time of the war with Xerxes, though even
then the sling was, perhaps, rarely used as a weapon. The Acarnanians
and the Achæans of Agium, Patræ, and Dymæ were very expert in the use of
the sling. That used by the Achæans was made of three thongs of leather,
and not of one only, like those of other nations. The natives of the
Balearic isles are said to have attained their skill from the
circumstance of their mothers, when they were children, obliging them to
obtain their food by striking it, from a tree, with a sling. While other
slings were made of leather, theirs were made of rushes. Besides stones,
plummets of lead, called ‘glandes,’ (as in the present instance), and μολύβδιδες , of a form
between acorns and almonds, were cast in moulds, to be thrown from
slings. They have been frequently dug up in various parts of Greece, and
particularly on the plains of Marathon. Some have the device of a
thunderbolt; while others are inscribed with δέξαι , ‘take
this.’ It was a prevalent idea with the ancients that the stone
discharged from the sling became red hot in its course, from the
swiftness of its motion. 85. Adjusts his mantle. ]—Ver. 733. ‘Chlamydemque ut pendeat
apte, Collocat,’ etc., is translated by Clarke—‘And he places his
coat that it might hang agreeably, that the border and all its gold
might appear.’ 86. That his wings. ]—Ver. 736. Clarke renders ‘ut tersis
niteant talaria plantis,’ ‘that his wings shine upon his spruce
feet.’ 87. God who inhabits Lemnos. ]—Ver. 757. Being precipitated from
heaven for his deformity, Vulcan fell upon the Isle of Lemnos, in the
Ægean Sea, where he exercised the craft of a blacksmith, according to
the mythologists. The birth of Ericthonius, by the aid of Minerva, is
here referred to. 88. Tritonia. ]—Ver. 783. Minerva is said to have been called
Tritonia, either from the Cretan word τριτω , signifying ‘a head,’ as she sprang from the head
of Jupiter; or from Trito, a lake of Libya, near which she was said
to have been born. 89. Tritonian. ]—Ver. 794. Athens, namely, which was sacred to
Pallas, or Minerva, its tutelary divinity. 90. Sidonis. ]—Ver. 840. Sidon, or Sidonis, was a maritime city
of Phœnicia, near Tyre, of whose greatness it was not an unworthy
rival. 97 83 BOOK THE THIRD. FABLE I. Jupiter , having carried away Europa,
her father, Agenor, commands his son Cadmus to go immediately in search
of her, and either to bring back his sister with him, or never to return
to Phœnicia. Cadmus, wearied with his toils and fruitless inquiries,
goes to consult the oracle at Delphi, which bids him observe the spot
where he should see a cow lie down, and build a city there, and give the
name of Bœotia to the country. And now the God, having laid aside
the shape of the deceiving Bull, had discovered himself, and reached the
Dictæan land; when her father, ignorant of her fate , commands
Cadmus to seek her thus ravished, and adds exile as the
punishment, if he does not find her; being both affectionate and
unnatural in the self-same act. The son of Agenor, having wandered over
the whole world, 1 as an exile flies from his country and the wrath of his
father, for who is there that can discover the intrigues of Jupiter?
A suppliant, he consults the oracle of Phœbus, and inquires in what
land he must dwell. “A heifer,” Phœbus says, “will meet thee in the
lonely fields, one that has never borne the yoke, and free from the
crooked plough. Under her guidance, go on thy way; and where she shall
lie down on the grass, there cause a city to be built, and call it the
Bœotian 2 city .” 98 III. 13-34 Scarcely had Cadmus well got down from the Castalian 84 III. 14-34 cave, 3 when he saw a heifer, without a keeper, slowly
going along, bearing no mark of servitude upon her neck. He follows, and
pursues her steps with leisurely pace, and silently adores Phœbus, the
adviser of his way. And now he had passed the fords of the
Cephisus, and the fields of Panope, when the cow stood still and
raising her forehead, expansive with lofty horns, towards heaven, she
made the air reverberate with her lowings. And so, looking back on her
companions that followed behind, she lay down, and reposed her side upon
the tender grass. Cadmus returned thanks, and imprinted kisses upon the
stranger land, and saluted the unknown mountains and fields. He was now going to offer sacrifice to Jupiter, and commanded his
servants to go and fetch some water for the libation from the running
springs. An ancient grove was standing there, as yet profaned by
no axe. There was a cavern in the middle of it , thick covered
with twigs and osiers, forming a low arch by the junction of the rocks;
abounding with plenty of water. Hid in this cavern, there was a dragon
sacred to Mars, 4 adorned with crests and a golden color . His eyes
sparkle with fire, and all his body is puffed out with poison;
three tongues, too , are brandished, and his teeth stand in a
triple row. EXPLANATION. Reverting to the history of Europa, it may be here remarked, that
Apollodorus has preserved her genealogy. Libya, according 99 III. 35-48 to that author, had two sons by Neptune, Belus and Agenor. The latter
married Telephassa, by whom he had Cadmus, Phœnix, and Cilix, and a
daughter named Europa. Some ancient writers, however, say, that Europa
was the daughter of Phœnix, and the grandchild of Agenor. Some authors, and Ovid among the rest, have supposed that Europe
received its name from Europa. Bochart has, with considerable
probability, suggested that it was originally so called from the fair
complexion of the 85 III. 35-49 people who inhabited it. Europa herself may have received her name also
from the fairness of her complexion: hence, the poets, as the Scholiast
on Theocritus tells us, invented a fable, that a daughter of Juno stole
her mother’s paint, to give it to Europa, who used it with so much
success as to ensure, by its use, an extremely fair and beautiful
complexion. FABLE II. The companions of Cadmus, fetching
water from the fountain of Mars, are devoured by the Dragon that guards
it. Cadmus, on discovering their destruction, slays the monster, and, by
the advice of Minerva, sows the teeth, which immediately produce a crop of
armed men. They forthwith quarrel among themselves, and kill each other,
with the exception of five who assist Cadmus in building the city of
Thebes. After the men who came from the
Tyrian nation had touched this grove with ill-fated steps, and the urn
let down into the water made a splash; the azure dragon stretched forth
his head from the deep cave, and uttered dreadful hissings. The urns
dropped from their hands; and the blood left their bodies, and a sudden
trembling seized their astonished limbs. He wreathes his scaly orbs in
rolling spires, and with a spring becomes twisted into mighty folds; and
uprearing himself from below the middle into the light air, he looks
down upon all the grove, and is of as large a size, 5 as, if you were to look
on him entire, the serpent which separates the two Bears. There is no delay; he seizes the Phœnicians (whether they are
resorting to their arms or to flight, or whether fear itself is
preventing either step ); some he kills with 100 III. 48-71 his sting, 6 some with his long folds, some breathed upon 7 by the venom
of his baneful poison. 86 III. 50-83 The sun, now at its height, had made the shadows but small:
the son of Agenor wonders what has detained his companion and goes to
seek his men. His garment was a skin torn from a lion; his weapon was a
lance with shining steel, and a javelin; and a courage superior to any
weapon. When he entered the grove, and beheld the lifeless bodies, and
the victorious enemy of immense size upon them, licking the horrid wounds with
bloodstained tongue, he said, “Either I will be the avenger of your
death, bodies of my faithful companions , or I will
be a sharer in it .” Thus he said; and with his right
hand he raised a huge stone, 8 and hurled the vast weight with
a tremendous effort. And although high walls with lofty towers
would have been shaken with the shock of it, yet the dragon
remained without a wound; and, being defended by his scales as though
with a coat of mail, and the hardness of his black hide, he repelled the
mighty stroke with his skin. But he did not overcome the javelin as well
with the same hardness; which stood fast, fixed in the middle joint of
his yielding spine, and sank with the entire point of steel into
his entrails. Fierce with pain, he turned his head towards his back, and
beheld his wounds, and bit the javelin fixed there. And after he had
twisted it on every side with all his might, with difficulty he wrenched
it from his back; yet the steel 101 III. 71-100 stuck fast in his bones. But then, when this newly inflicted wound has
increased his wonted fury, his throat swelled with gorged veins, and
white foam flowed around his pestilential jaws. The Earth, too, scraped
with the scales, sounds again, and the livid steam that issues from his infernal
mouth, 9 infects the tainted air. One while he is enrolled in
spires making enormous rings; sometimes he unfolds himself straighter
than a long beam. Now with a vast impulse, like a torrent swelled with
rain, he is borne along, and bears down the obstructing forests with his
breast. The son of Agenor gives way a little; and by the spoil of the
lion he sustains the shock, and with his lance extended before him,
pushes back his mouth, as it advances. 87 III. 83-112 The dragon rages, and vainly inflicts wounds on the hard steel, and
fixes his teeth upon the point. And now the blood began to flow from his
poisonous palate, and had dyed the green grass with its spray. But the
wound was slight; because he recoiled from the stroke, and drew back his
wounded throat, and by shrinking prevented the blow from sinking deep,
and did not suffer it to go very far. At length, the son of Agenor,
still pursuing, pressed the spear lodged in his throat, until an oak
stood in his way as he retreated, and his neck was pierced, together
with the trunk. The tree was bent with the weight of the serpent, and
groaned at having its trunk lashed with the extremity of its tail. While the conqueror was surveying the vast size of his vanquished
enemy, a voice was suddenly heard (nor was it easy to understand
whence it was , but heard it was). “Why, son of Agenor, art thou thus contemplating the dragon slain by thee ? Even thou thyself shalt be seen in the form of a dragon.” 10 He, for
a long time in alarm, lost his color together with his presence of mind,
and his hair stood on end with a chill 102 III. 101-119 of terror. Lo! Pallas, the favorer of the hero, descending through the
upper region of the air, comes to him, and bids him sow the dragon’s
teeth under the earth turned up, as the seeds of a future people. He
obeyed; and when he had opened a furrow with the pressed plough, he
scattered the teeth on the ground as ordered, the seed of a race of men.
Afterwards (’tis beyond belief) the turf began to move, and first
appeared a point of a spear out of the furrows, next the coverings of
heads nodding with painted cones; 11 then the shoulders and the breast,
and the arms laden with weapons start up, and a crop of men armed with
shields grows apace. So, when the curtains 12 are drawn up in the
joyful theaters, figures 88 III. 112-130 are wont to rise, and first to show their countenances; by degrees the
rest; and being drawn out in a gradual continuation, the whole appear,
and place their feet on the lowest edge of the stage . Alarmed
with this new enemy, Cadmus is preparing to take arms, when one of the
people that the earth had produced cries out, “Do not take up arms , nor engage thyself in civil war .” And then, engaged hand
to hand, he strikes one of his earth-born brothers with the cruel sword, while he himself falls by a dart sent from a distance. 103 III. 120-130 He, also, who had put him to death, lives no longer than the other, and
breathes forth the air which he has so lately received. In a similar
manner, too, the whole troop becomes maddened, and the brothers so newly sprung up, fall in fight with each other, by mutual
wounds. And now the youths that had the space of so short an
existence allotted them, beat with throbbing breast their blood-stained
mother, five only remaining, of whom Echion 13 was one. He, by the
advice of Tritonia, threw his arms upon the ground, and both asked and
gave the assurance of brotherly concord. The Sidonian stranger had these as associates in his task, when he
built the city that was ordered by the oracle of Phœbus. EXPLANATION. Agenor, on losing his daughter, commands his sons to go in search of
her, and not to return till they have found her. The young princes,
either unable to learn what was become of her, or, perhaps, being too
weak to recover her out of the hands of the king of Crete, did not
return to their 89 father, but established themselves in different countries; Cadmus
settling in Bœotia, Cilix in Cilicia, to which he gave his name, and
Phœnix, as Hyginus tells us, remaining in Africa. Photius, quoting from
Conon, the historian, informs us, that the hope of conquering some
country in Europe, and establishing a colony there, was the true ground
of the voyage of Cadmus. Palæphatus, and other writers, say, that the Dragon which was killed by
Cadmus was a king of the country, who was named Draco, and was a son of
Mars: that his teeth were his subjects, who rallied again after their
defeat, and that Cadmus put them all to the sword, except Chthonius,
Udeus, Hyperenor, Pelor, and Echion, who became reconciled to him.
Heraclitus, however, assures us, that Cadmus really did slay a serpent,
which was very annoying to the Bœotian territory. Bochart and
Le Clerc are of opinion that the Fable has the following
foundation:—They say, that in the Phœnician language, the same
word signifies either the teeth of a serpent, or short javelins, pointed
with brass; that the word which signifies the number five likewise means
an army; and that probably, from these circumstances, the Fable may have
taken its rise. For the Greeks, in following the annals written in the
Phœnician language, while writing the history of the founder of Thebes,
instead of describing his soldiers as wearing helmets on their heads,
with back and breast-plates, and with darts in their 104 III. 131- 132 hands pointed with brass, which equipment was then entirely novel in
Greece, chose rather to follow the more wonderful version, and to say,
that Cadmus had five companions produced from the teeth of a serpent;
as, according to Bochart’s suggestion, the same Phœnician phrase may
either signify a company of men sprung from the teeth of a serpent, or a
company of men armed with brazen darts. This conjecture is, perhaps, confirmed by a story related by Herodotus
(book ii.), which resembles it very much. He tells us, that Psammeticus,
king of Egypt, being driven to the marshy parts of his kingdom, sent to
consult the oracle of Latona, which answered that he should be restored
by brass men coming from the sea. At the time, this answer appeared to
him entirely frivolous; but certain Ionian soldiers, being obliged, some
years after, to retire to Egypt, and appearing on the shore with their
weapons and armor, all of brass, those who perceived them ran
immediately to inform the king, that men clad in brass were plundering
the country. The prince then fully comprehended the meaning of the
oracle, and making an alliance with them, recovered his throne by the
assistance they gave him. These brass men come from the sea, and those
sprung from the earth were soldiers who assisted Psammeticus and Cadmus
in carrying out their objects. Bochart’s conjecture is strengthened by
the fact, that Cadmus was either the inventor of the cuirass and
javelin, or the first that brought them into Greece. Without inquiring
further into the subject, we may conclude, that the men sprung from the
earth, or the dragon’s teeth which were sown, were the people of the
country, whom Cadmus found means to bring over to his interest; and that
they first helped him to conquer his enemies, and then to build the
citadel of Thebes, to ensure his future security. Apollodorus says that
Cadmus, to expiate the slaughter of the dragon, was obliged to serve
Mars a whole year; which year, containing eight of 90 III. 131-142 our years, it is not improbable that Cadmus rendered services for a long
time to his new allies before he received any assistance from them. FABLE III. Actæon , the grandson of Cadmus,
fatigued with hunting and excessive heat, inadvertently wanders to the
cool valley of Gargaphie, the usual retreat of Diana, when tired with
the same exercise. There, to his misfortune, he surprises the Goddess
and her Nymphs while bathing, for which she transforms him into a stag,
and his own hounds tear him to pieces. And now Thebes was standing; now
Cadmus, thou mightst seem happy in thy exile. Both Mars and Venus 14 105 III. 132-150 had become thy father-in-law and mother-in-law; add to this, issue by a
wife so illustrious, so many sons 15 and daughters, and grandchildren,
dear pledges of love ; these, too, now of a youthful age. But,
forsooth, the last day of life must always be awaited by man, and
no one ought to be pronounced happy before his death, 16 and his last
obsequies. Thy grandson, Cadmus, was the first occasion of sorrow to
thee, among so much prosperity, the horns, too, not his own, placed upon
his forehead, and you, O dogs, glutted with the blood of your
master. But, if you diligently inquire into his case , you will
find the fault of an accident, and not criminality in him; for what
criminality did mistake embrace? 91 III. 143-170 There was a mountain stained with the blood of various wild beasts;
and now the day had contracted the meridian shadow of things, and the
sun was equally distant from each extremity of the heavens ; when
the Hyantian youth 17 thus addressed the partakers of his toils,
as they wandered along the lonely haunts of the wild beasts , with
gentle accent: “Our nets are moistened, my friends, and our spears, too,
with the blood of wild beasts; and the day has yielded sufficient sport;
when the next morn, borne upon her rosy chariot, shall bring back the
light, let us seek again our proposed 106 III. 151-173 task. Now Phœbus is at the same distance from both lands, the Eastern
and the Western , and is cleaving the fields with his heat. Cease
your present toils, and take away the knotted nets.” The men execute his
orders, and cease their labors. There was a valley, thick set with
pitch-trees and the sharp-pointed cypress; by name Gargaphie, 18 sacred
to the active Diana. In the extreme recess of this, there was a grotto
in a grove, formed by no art; nature, by her ingenuity, had
counterfeited art; for she had formed a natural arch, in the native
pumice and the light sand-stones. A limpid fountain ran murmuring
on the right hand with its little stream, having its spreading channels
edged with a border of grass. Here, when wearied with hunting,
the Goddess of the woods was wont to bathe her virgin limbs in clear
water . After she had entered there, she handed to one of the Nymphs, her
armor-bearer, her javelin, her quiver, and her unstrung bow. Another
Nymph put her arms under her mantle, when taken off: two removed the
sandals from her feet. But Crocale, 19 the daughter of Ismenus, more
skilled than they, gathered her hair, which lay scattered over her neck,
into a knot, although she herself was with her hair loose. 92 III. 171-197 Nephele, 20 and Hyale, 21 and Rhanis, 22 fetch water, Psecas 23 and Phyale 24 do the same , and pour it from their large
urns. And while the Titanian Goddess was there bathing in the
wonted 107 III. 174-198 stream, behold! the grandson of Cadmus, having deferred the remainder of
his sport till next day , came into the grove, wandering through
the unknown wood, with uncertain steps; thus did his fate direct
him. Soon as he entered the grotto, dropping with its springs, the Nymphs,
naked as they were, on seeing a man, smote their breasts, and filled all
the woods with sudden shrieks, and gathering round Diana, covered her
with their bodies. Yet the Goddess herself was higher than they, and was
taller than them all by the neck. The color that is wont to be in
clouds, tinted by the rays of the sun when opposite, or that of
the ruddy morning, was on the features of Diana, when seen without her
garments. She, although surrounded with the crowd of her attendants,
stood sideways, and turned her face back; and how did she wish that she
had her arrows at hand; and so she took up water, 25 which she did
have at hand , and threw it over the face of the man, and
sprinkling his hair with the avenging stream, she added these words, the
presages of his future woe: “Now thou mayst tell, if tell thou canst, how that I
was seen by thee without my garments.” Threatening no more, she places
on his sprinkled head the horns of a lively stag; she adds length to his
neck, and sharpens the tops of his ears; and she changes his hands into
feet, and his arms into long legs, and covers his body with a spotted
coat of hair; fear, too is added. 93 III. 198-212 The Autonoëian 26 hero took to flight, and wondered 108 III. 199-213 that he was so swift in his speed; but when he beheld his own horns in
the wonted stream, he was about to say, “Ah, wretched me!” when no voice followed. He groaned; that was all his voice, and his
tears trickled down a face not his own, but that of a stag . His
former understanding alone remained. What should he do? Should he return
home, and to the royal abode? or should he lie hid in the woods? Fear
hinders the one step , shame the other. While he was hesitating,
the dogs espied him, and first Melampus, 27 and the good-nosed
Ichnobates gave the signal, in full cry. Ichnobates, 28 was a Gnossian dog ; Melampus was of Spartan breed. Then the rest rush on,
swifter than the rapid winds; Pamphagus, 29 and Dorcæus, 30 and
Oribasus, 31 all Arcadian dogs ; and able Nebrophonus, 32 and with Lælaps, 33 fierce Theron, 34 and Pterelas, 35 excelling in 94 III. 212-221 speed, Agre 36 in her scent, and Hylæus, 37 109 III. 214-223 lately wounded by a fierce boar, and Nape, 38 begotten by a wolf,
and Pœmenis, 39 that had tended cattle, and Harpyia, 40 followed by
her two whelps, and the Sicyonian Ladon, 41 having a slender
girth; Dromas, 42 too, and Canace, 43 Sticte, 44 and Tigris, and
Alce, 45 and Leucon , 46 with snow-white hair, and Asbolus, 47 with
black, and the able-bodied Lacon, 48 and Aëllo, 49 good at running, and
Thoüs, 50 and swift Lycisca, 51 with her Cyprian
brother, Harpalus , 52 too, having his black face marked
with white down 95 III. 221-245 the middle, and Melaneus, 53 and Lachne, 54 with a wire-haired body, and 110 III. 224-246 Labros, 55 and Agriodos, 56 bred of a Dictæan sire, but of a
Laconian dam, and Hylactor , 57 with his shrill note; and others
which it were tedious to recount. This pack, in eagerness for their prey, are borne over rocks and
cliffs, and crags difficult of approach, where the path is steep, and
where there is no road. He flies along the routes by which he has so
often pursued; alas! he is now flying from his own servants. Fain
would he have cried, “I am Actæon, recognize your own master.”
Words are wanting to his wishes; the air resounds with their barking.
Melanchætes 58 was the first to make a wound on his back,
Theridamas 59 the next; Oresitrophus 60 fastened upon his
shoulder. These had gone out later, but their course was shortened by a
near cut through the hill. While they hold their master, the rest of the
pack come up, and fasten their teeth in his body. Now room is wanting
for more wounds. He groans, and utters a noise, though not that
of a man, still , such as a stag cannot make; and he fills the
well-known mountains with dismal moans, and suppliant on his bended
knees, and like one in entreaty, he turns round his silent looks as
though they were his arms. But his companions, in their ignorance, urge on the eager pack with
their usual cries, and seek Actæon with their eyes; and cry out “Actæon”
aloud, as though he were absent. At his name he turns his head, as they
complain that he is not 96 III. 245-252 there, and in his indolence, is not enjoying a sight of the sport
afforded them. He wished, indeed, he had been away, but there 111 III. 247-252 he was; and he wished to see, not to feel as well, the cruel feats of
his own dogs. They gather round him on all sides, and burying their jaws
in his body, tear their master in pieces under the form of an imaginary
stag. And the rage of the quiver-bearing Diana is said not to have been
satiated, until his life was ended by many a wound. EXPLANATION. If the maxim of Horace, ‘Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus,’
had been a little more frequently observed by the ancient poets, their
Deities would not have been so often placed in a degrading or disgusting
light before posterity. There cannot be a better illustration of the
truth of this than the present Fable, where Ovid represents the chaste
and prudent Diana as revenging herself in a cruel and barbarous manner
for the indiscretion, or rather misfortune, of an innocent young
man. Cicero mentions several Goddesses of the name of Diana. The first was
the daughter of Jupiter and Proserpine; the second of Jupiter and
Latona; and the third of Upis and Glauce. Strabo mentions another Diana,
named Britomartis, the daughter of Eubalus. The worship, however, of
Diana as the Goddess of the Moon, was, most probably, derived from
Egypt, with the Isis of whom she is perhaps identical. The adventure
narrated in this Fable is most probably to be attributed to Diana
Britomartis, as Strabo tells us, that she was particularly fond of the
chase. Pausanias, in his Attica, tells the story in much the same terms,
but he adds, that on seeing Diana bathing, the novelty of the sight
excited Actæon’s curiosity, and prompted him to approach nearer. To
explain this fable, some authors suggest, that Actæon’s dogs becoming
mad, devoured him; while others suppose, that having ruined himself by
the expense of supporting a large pack of hounds, and a hunting
establishment, it was reported that he had been devoured by his dogs.
Diodorus Siculus, and Euripides, tell us, that Actæon showed contempt to
Diana, and was about to eat of the sacrifice that had been offered to
her; and of course, in such a case, punishment at the hands of the
Goddess would be deemed a just retribution. Apollodorus says, that
Actæon was brought up by Chiron, and that he was put to death on Mount
Cithæron, for having seen Diana bathing; though, according to one
ancient authority, he was punished for having made improper overtures to
Semele. Apollodorus also says, that his dogs died of grief, on the loss
of their master, and he has preserved some of their names. 112 III. 253-274 97 III. 253-277 FABLE IV. Juno , incensed against Semele for her
intrigue with Jupiter, takes the form of Beroë, the more easily to
ensure her revenge. Having first infused in Semele suspicions of her
lover, she then recommends her to adopt a certain method of proving his
constancy. Semele, thus deceived, obtains a reluctant promise from
Jupiter, to make his next visit to her in the splendor and majesty in
which he usually approached his wife. They speak in various ways of
this matter . To some, the Goddess seems more severe than is proper;
others praise her, and call her deserving of her state of strict
virginity: both sides find their reasons. The wife of Jupiter alone does
not so much declare whether she blames or whether she approves, as she
rejoices at the calamity of a family sprung from Agenor, and transfers
the hatred that she has conceived from the Tyrian mistress to the
partners of her race. Lo! a fresh occasion is now added to
the former one; and she grieves that Semele is pregnant from the seed of
great Jupiter. She then lets loose her tongue to abuse. “And what good have I done by railing so often?” said she. “She
herself must be attacked by me . If I am properly called the
supreme Juno, I will destroy her; if it becomes me to hold the
sparkling sceptre in my right hand; if I am the queen, and both the
sister and wife of Jupiter. The sister I am , no doubt. But I
suppose she is content with a stolen embrace, and the injury to my bed
is but trifling. She is now pregnant; that alone was
wanting; and she bears the evidence of his crime in her swelling womb,
and wishes to be made a mother by Jupiter, a thing which hardly
fell to my lot alone. So great is her confidence in her beauty.
I will take care 61 he shall deceive her; and may I be no daughter
of Saturn, if she does not descend to the Stygian waves, sunk there by her own dear Jupiter.” Upon this she rises from her throne, and, hidden in a cloud of fiery
hue, she approaches the threshold of 113 III. 274-301 Semele. Nor did she remove the clouds before she counterfeited an old
woman, and planted gray hair on her temples; and furrowed her skin with
wrinkles, and moved her bending limbs with palsied step, 98 III. 277-301 and made her voice that of an old woman. She became Beroë 62 herself,
the Epidaurian 63 nurse of Semele. When, therefore, upon engaging in
discourse with her, and after long talking, they came to the name
of Jupiter, she sighed, and said, “I only wish it may be
Jupiter; yet I am apt to fear everything. Many a one under the
name of a God has invaded a chaste bed. Nor yet is it enough that he is
Jupiter; let him, if, indeed, he is the real one, give some pledge of
his affection; and beg of him to bestow his caresses on thee, just in
the greatness and form in which he is received by the stately Juno; and
let him first assume his ensigns of royalty .” With such words did
Juno tutor the unsuspecting daughter of Cadmus. She requested of Jupiter
a favor, without naming it. To her the God said, “Make thy choice, thou
shalt suffer no denial; and that thou mayst believe it the more, let the
majesty of the Stygian stream bear witness. He is the dread and
the God of the Gods.” Overjoyed at what was her misfortune, and too easily prevailing, as now about to perish by the complaisance of her lover,
Semele said, “Present thyself to me, just such as the daughter of Saturn
is wont to embrace thee, when ye honor the ties of Venus.” The God
wished to shut her mouth as she spoke, but the hasty words had
now escaped into air. He groaned; for neither was it now possible
for her not to have wished, nor for him not to have sworn. Therefore, in
extreme sadness, he mounted the lofty skies, and with his nod drew along
the attendant clouds; to which he added showers and lightnings mingled
with winds, and thunders, and the inevitable thunderbolt. 114 III. 302-315 EXPLANATION. It is most probable, that an intrigue between a female named Semele and
one of the princes called Jupiter having had a tragical end, gave
occasion to this Fable. Pausanias, in his Laconica, tells us, that
Cadmus, exasperated against his daughter Semele, caused her and her son
to be thrown into the sea; and that being thrown ashore at Oreate, an
ancient town of Laconia, Semele was buried there. 99 III. 302-316 Semele, according to Apollodorus, was, after her death, ranked among the
Goddesses by the name of Thyone. He says that her son Bacchus going down
to hell, brought her thence, and carried her up to heaven; where,
according to Nonnus, she conversed with Pallas and Diana, and ate at the
same table with Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, and Venus. The author, known by
the name of Orpheus, gives Semele the title of Goddess, and Πανβασίλεια , or ‘Queen of the Universe.’ FABLE V. Semele is visited by Jupiter, according
to the promise she had obliged him to make; but, being unable to support
the effulgence of his lightning, she is burnt to ashes in his presence.
Bacchus, with whom she is pregnant, is preserved; and Tiresias decided
the dispute between Jupiter and Juno, concerning the sexes. And yet, as much as possible, he
tries to mitigate his powers. Nor is he now armed with those flames with
which he had overthrown the hundred-handed Typhœus; in those, there
is too much fury. There is another thunder, less baneful, to which
the right hand of the Cyclops gave less ferocity and flames, and less anger. The Gods above call this second-rate thunder; it he assumes,
and he enters the house of Agenor. Her mortal body could not endure 64 the æthereal shock, and she was burned amid her nuptial presents. The
infant, as yet unformed, is taken out of the womb of his mother, and
prematurely (if we can believe it) is inserted in the thigh of the
father, and completes the time that he should have spent in the womb.
His aunt, Ino, nurses him privately in his early cradle. After that, the
Nyseian Nymphs 65 conceal him, entrusted to 115 III. 315-338 them , in their caves, and give him the nourishment of milk. And while these things are transacted on earth by the 100 III. 316-342 law of destiny, and the cradle of Bacchus, twice born, 66 is secured;
they tell that Jupiter, by chance, well drenched with nectar, laid aside all weighty cares, and engaged in some free jokes with Juno, in
her idle moments, and said: “Decidedly the pleasure of you, females , is greater than that which falls to the lot of us males.” She denied it. It was agreed between them , to ask what
was the opinion of the experienced Tiresias. To him both pleasures were
well known. For he had separated with a blow of his staff two bodies of
large serpents, as they were coupling in a green wood; and (passing
strange) become a woman from a man, he had spent seven autumns.
In the eighth, he again saw the same serpents , and said, “If the
power of a stroke given you is so great as to change the condition of
the giver into the opposite one, I will now strike you again.”
Having struck the same snakes, his former sex returned, and his original
shape came again . He, therefore, being chosen as umpire in this
sportive contest, confirmed the words of Jove. The daughter of Saturn is
said to have grieved more than was fit, and not in proportion to the
subject; and she condemned the eyes of the umpire to eternal
darkness. But the omnipotent father (for it is not allowed any God to cancel
the acts of another Deity) gave him the knowledge of things to
come, in recompense for his loss of sight, and alleviated his punishment
by this honor. 116 III. 339-362 FABLE VI. Echo , having often amused Juno with her
stories, to give time to Jupiter’s mistresses to make their escape, the
Goddess, at last, punishes her for the deception. She is slighted and
despised by Narcissus, with whom she falls in love. He , much celebrated by fame
throughout the cities of Aonia, 67 gave unerring answers to the people
consulting him. The azure Liriope 68 was the first to make essay and
experiment of 101 III. 342-371 his infallible voice; whom once Cephisus encircled in his winding
stream, and offered violence to, when enclosed by his waters. The
most beauteous Nymph produced an infant from her teeming womb, which
even then might have been beloved, and she called him Narcissus. Being
consulted concerning him, whether he was destined to see the distant
season of mature old age; the prophet, expounding destiny, said, “If he
never recognizes himself.” Long did the words of the soothsayer appear
frivolous; but the event, the thing itself , the manner of
his death, and the novel nature of his frenzy, confirmed it. And now the son of Cephisus had added one to three times five years,
and he might seem to be a boy and a young man as well. Many a youth, 69 and many a damsel, courted him; but there was so stubborn a pride in his
youthful beauty, that no youths, no damsels made any impression
on him. The noisy Nymph, who has neither learned to hold her tongue
after another speaking, nor to speak first herself, resounding Echo,
espied him, as he was driving the timid stags into his nets. Echo was
then a body, not a voice; and yet the babbler had no other use of her
speech than she now has, to be able to repeat the last words out of
many. 117 III. 362-385 Juno had done this; because when often she might have been able to
detect the Nymphs in the mountains in the embrace of her husband ,
Jupiter, she purposely used to detain 70 the Goddess with a long story,
until the Nymphs had escaped. After the daughter of Saturn perceived this , she said, “But small exercise of this tongue, with which I
have been deluded, shall be allowed thee, and a very short use of thy
voice.” And she confirmed her threats by the event. Still, in the end of
one’s speaking she redoubles the voice, and returns the words she hears.
When, therefore, she beheld Narcissus 71 wandering through 102 III. 371-401 the pathless forests, and fell in love with him, she stealthily followed
his steps; and the more she followed him, with the nearer flame did she
burn. In no other manner than as when the native sulphur, spread
around 72 the tops of torches, catches the flame applied to
it . Ah! how often did she desire to accost him in soft accents, and
to employ soft entreaties! Nature resists, and suffers her not to begin;
but what Nature does permit, that she is ready for; to await his
voice, to which to return her own words. By chance, the youth, being separated from the trusty company of his
attendants, cries out, “Is there any one here?” and Echo answers “Here!”
He is amazed; and when he has cast his eyes on every side, he cries out
with a loud voice, “Come!” Whereon she calls the youth who
calls. He looks back; and again, as no one comes, he says, “Why dost
thou avoid me?” and just as many words as he spoke, he receives. He
persists; and being deceived by the imitation of an alternate 118 III. 385-401 voice, he says, “Let us come together here;” and Echo, that could never
more willingly answer any sound whatever, replies, “Let us come together
here!” and she follows up her own words, and rushing from the woods, 73 is going to throw her arms around the neck she has so longed for.
He flies; and as he flies, he exclaims, “Remove thy hands from thus
embracing me; I will die first, before thou shalt have the
enjoyment of me.” She answers nothing but “Have the enjoyment of me.” Thus rejected, she lies hid in the woods, and hides her blushing
face with green leaves, and from that time lives in lonely caves; but
yet her love remains, and increases from the mortification of her
refusal. Watchful cares waste away her miserable body; leanness shrivels
her skin, and all the juices of her body fly off in air. Her voice and
her bones alone are left. Her voice still continues, but they say that her bones
received the form of stones. Since then, she lies concealed in the
woods, and is never seen on the mountains: but is heard in all of them . It is her voice alone which remains alive in
her. 103 III. 402-413 EXPLANATION. It appears much more reasonable to attempt the explanation of this story
on the grounds of natural philosophy than of history. The poets, in
their fondness for basing every subject upon fiction, probably invented
the fable, to explain what to them appeared an extraordinary phenomenon.
By way of embellishing their story, they tell us that Echo was the
daughter of the Air and the Tongue, and that the God Pan fell in love
with her; by which, probably, the simple fact is meant, that some
person, represented under the name of that god, endeavored to trace the
cause of this phenomenon. If, however, we should endeavor to base the story upon purely historical
grounds, we may suppose that it took its rise from some Nymph, who
wandered so far into the woods as to be unable to find her way out
again; and from the fact that those who went to seek her, hearing
nothing but the echo of their own voices, brought back the strange but
unsatisfactory intelligence that the Nymph had been changed into a
voice. 119 III. 401-419 FABLE VII. Narcissus falls in love with his own
shadow, which he sees in a fountain; and, pining to death, the Gods
change him into a flower, which still bears his name. Thus had he deceived her, thus, too,
other Nymphs that sprung from the water or the mountains, thus the
throng of youths before them . Some one, therefore, who had been
despised by him , lifting up his hands towards heaven, said,
“Thus, though he should love, let him not enjoy what he loves!”
Rhamnusia 74 assented to a prayer so reasonable. There was a clear
spring, like silver, with its unsullied waters, which neither shepherds,
nor she-goats feeding on the mountains, nor any other cattle, had
touched; which neither bird nor wild beast had disturbed, nor bough
falling from a tree. There was grass around it, which the neighboring
water nourished, and a wood, that suffered the stream to become warm
with no rays of the sun. Here the youth, fatigued both with the
labor of hunting and the 104 III. 413-445 heat, lay down, attracted by the appearance of the spot, and the spring;
and, while he was endeavoring to quench his thirst, another thirst grew upon him . While he is drinking, being attracted with the reflection of his own
form, seen in the water , he falls in love with a thing that has
no substance; and he thinks that to be a body, which is but a shadow. He is astonished at himself, and remains unmoved
with the same countenance, like a statue formed of Parian marble. 75 120 III. 420-450 Lying on the ground, he gazes on his eyes like two stars, and
fingers worthy of Bacchus, and hair worthy of Apollo, and his youthful
cheeks and ivory neck, and the comeliness of his mouth, and his blushing
complexion mingled with the whiteness of snow; and everything he
admires, for which he himself is worthy to be admired. In his ignorance,
he covets himself; and he that approves, is himself the thing approved. While he pursues he is pursued, and at the same moment he
inflames and burns. How often does he give vain kisses to the deceitful
spring; how often does he thrust his arms, catching at the neck he sees,
into the middle of the water, and yet he does not catch himself in them.
He knows not what he sees, but what he sees, by it is he inflamed; and
the same mistake that deceives his eyes, provokes them. Why, credulous youth , dost thou vainly catch at the flying image? What thou art
seeking is nowhere; what thou art in love with, turn but away and thou shalt lose it; what thou seest, the same is but the shadow
of a reflected form; it has nothing of its own. It comes and stays with
thee; with thee it will depart, if thou canst but depart
thence. No regard for food, 76 no regard for repose, can draw him away
thence; but, lying along upon the overshadowed grass, he gazes upon the
fallacious image with unsatiated eyes, and by his own sight he himself
is undone. Raising himself a little while , extending his arms to
the woods that stand around him, he says, “Was ever, O, ye woods!
any one more fatally in love? For this ye know, and have been a
convenient shelter for many a one. And do you remember any one, who ever thus pined away, 105 III. 445-480 during so long a time, though so many ages of your life has been spent?
It both pleases me and I see it; but what I see, and what pleases me,
yet I cannot obtain; so great a mistake possesses one in love; and to
make me grieve the more, neither a vast sea separates us, nor a long way, nor mountains, nor a city with its gates closed; we are
kept asunder by a little water. He himself wishes to be embraced; for as 121 III. 451-483 often as I extend my lips to the limpid stream, so often does he
struggle towards me with his face held up; you would think he might be
touched. It is a very little that stands in the way of lovers. Whoever
thou art, come up hither. Why, dear boy, the choice one, dost
thou deceive me? or whither dost thou retire, when pursued? Surely,
neither my form nor my age is such as thou shouldst shun; the Nymphs,
too, have courted me. Thou encouragest I know not what hopes in me with
that friendly look, and when I extend my arms to thee, thou willingly
extendest thine; when I smile, thou smilest in return; often, too, have
I observed thy tears, when I was weeping; my signs, too, thou returnest
by thy nods, and, as I guess by the motion of thy beauteous mouth, thou
returnest words that come not to my ears. In thee ’tis I,
I now perceive; nor does my form deceive me. I burn
with the love of myself, and both raise the flames and endure them. What
shall I do? Should I be entreated, or should I entreat? What, then,
shall I entreat? What I desire is in my power; plenty has made me poor.
Oh! would that I could depart from my own body! a new wish, indeed , in a lover; I could wish that what I am in love with
was away. And now grief is taking away A my strength, and no long period of my
life remains; and in my early days am I cut off; nor is death grievous
to me, now about to get rid of my sorrows by death. I wish that he
who is beloved could enjoy a longer life. Now we two, of one mind, shall
die in the extinction of one life.” Thus he said, and, with his mind but ill at ease, he
returned to the same reflection, and disturbed the water with his tears;
and the form was rendered defaced by the moving of the stream; when he
saw it beginning to disappear, he cried aloud, “Whither dost thou
fly? Stay, I beseech thee! and do not in thy cruelty abandon thy
lover; let it be allowed me to behold that which I may not touch, and to
give nourishment to my wretched frenzy.” And, while he was grieving, he 106 III. 480-510 tore his garment from the upper border, and beat his naked breast with
his palms, white as marble. His breast, when struck, received a little
redness, no otherwise than as 122 III. 484-510 apples are wont, which are partly white and partly red; or as a
grape, not yet ripe, in the parti-colored clusters, is wont to assume a
purple tint. Soon as he beheld this again in the water, when clear, he
could not endure it any longer; but, as yellow wax with the fire, or the
hoar frost of the morning, is wont to waste away with the warmth of the
sun, so he, consumed by love, pined away, and wasted by degrees with a
hidden flame. And now, no longer was his complexion of white mixed with
red; neither his vigor nor his strength, nor the points which had
charmed when seen so lately, nor even his body, which formerly
Echo had been in love with, now remained. Yet, when she saw these
things, although angry, and mindful of his usage of her , she was
grieved, and, as often as the unhappy youth said, “Alas!” she repeated,
“Alas!” with re-echoing voice; and when he struck his arms with his
hands, she, too, returned the like sound of a blow. His last accents, as he looked into the water, as usual, were these:
“Ah, youth, beloved in vain!” and the spot returned just as many words;
and after he had said, “Farewell!” Echo, too, said, “Farewell!” He laid
down his wearied head upon the green grass, when night closed the
eyes that admired the beauty of their master; and even then, after he
had been received into the infernal abodes, he used to look at himself
in the Stygian waters. His Naiad sisters lamented him, and laid their
hair, 77 cut off, over their brother; the Dryads, too,
lamented him, and Echo resounded to their lamentations. And now
they were preparing the funeral pile, and the shaken torches, and the
bier. The body was nowhere to be found . Instead of his body, they
found a yellow flower, with white leaves encompassing it in the
middle. EXPLANATION. If this story is based upon any historical facts, they are entirely lost
to us; as all we learn from history concerning Narcissus, is the 123 III. 511-512 fact that he was a Thespian by birth. The Fable seems rather to be
intended as a 107 III. 511-512 useful moral lesson, disclosing the fatal effects of self-love. His
pursuit, too, of his own image, ever retiring from his embrace, strongly
resembles the little reality that exists in many of those pleasures
which mankind so eagerly pursue. Pausanias, in his Bœotica, somewhat varies the story. He tells us that
Narcissus having lost his sister, whom he tenderly loved, and who
resembled him very much, and was his constant companion in the chase,
thought, on seeing himself one day in a fountain, that it was the shade
of his lost sister, and, thereupon, pined away and died of grief.
According to him, the fountain was near a village called Donacon, in the
country of the Thespians. Pausanias regards the account of his change
into the flower which bears his name as a mere fiction, since Pamphus
says that Proserpina, when carried away, long before the time of
Narcissus, gathered that flower in the fields of Enna; and that the same
flower was sacred to her. Persons sacrificing to the Furies, or
Eumenides, used to wear chaplets made of the Narcissus, because that
flower commonly grew about graves and sepulchres. Tiresias, who predicted the untoward fate of Narcissus, was, as we are
informed by Apollodorus, the son of Evenus and Chariclo, and was the
most renowned soothsayer of his time. He lost his life by drinking of
the fountain of Telphusa when he was overheated; or, as some suppose,
through the unwholesome quality of the water. As he lived to a great
age, and became blind towards the end of his life, the story, which Ovid
mentions, was invented respecting him. Another version of it was, that
he lost his sight, by reason of his having seen Minerva while bathing.
This story was very probably based either upon the fact that he had
composed a Treatise upon the Animal Functions of the Sexes, or that he
had promulgated the doctrine that the stars had not only souls
(a common opinion in those times), but also that they were of
different sexes. He is supposed to have lived about 1200 years before
the Christian era. FABLE VIII. Pentheus ridicules the predictions of
Tiresias; and not only forbids his people to worship Bacchus, who had
just entered Greece in triumph, but even commands them to capture him,
and to bring him into his presence. Under the form of Acœtes, one of his
companions, Bacchus suffers that indignity, and relates to Pentheus the
wonders which the God had wrought. The recital enrages Pentheus still
more, who thereupon goes to Mount Cithæron, to disturb the orgies then
celebrating there; on which his own mother and the other Bacchantes tear
him to pieces. This thing, when known, brought
deserved fame to the prophet through the cities of Achaia; 78 and
great 124 III. 513-537 was the reputation 108 III. 512-534 of the soothsayer. Yet Pentheus, 79 the son of Echion, a contemner
of the Gods above, alone, of all men, despises him, and derides the
predicting words of the old man, and upbraids him with his darkened
state, and the misfortune of having lost his sight. He, shaking
his temples, white with hoary hair, says: “How fortunate wouldst thou
be, if thou as well couldst become deprived of this light, that thou
mightst not behold the rites of Bacchus. For soon the day will come, and
even now I predict that it is not far off, when the new God Liber, the son of Semele, shall come hither. Unless thou shalt vouchsafe
him the honor of a temple, thou shalt be scattered, torn in pieces, in a
thousand places, and with thy blood thou shalt pollute both the woods,
and thy mother and the sisters of thy mother. These things will
come to pass; for thou wilt not vouchsafe honor to the Divinity; and
thou wilt complain that under this darkness I have seen too much.” The son of Echion drives him away as he says such things as these.
Confirmation follows his words, and the predictions of the prophet are
fulfilled. Liber comes, and the fields resound with festive howlings.
The crowd runs out; both matrons and new-married women mixed with the
men, both high and low, are borne along to the celebration of rites till then unknown. “What madness,” says Pentheus, “has
confounded your minds, O ye warlike men, 80 descendants of the
Dragon? Can brass knocked against brass prevail so much with you? And
the pipe with the bending horn, and these magical delusions? And shall
the yells of women, and madness produced by wine, and troops of
effeminate wretches , and empty tambourines 81 prevail 125 III. 538-550 over you, whom neither the warrior’s sword 109 III. 535-549 nor the trumpet could affright, nor troops with weapons prepared for
fight ? Am I to wonder at you, old men, who, carried over distant
seas, have fixed in these abodes a new Tyre, and your banished
household Gods, but who now allow them to be taken without a
struggle? Or you, of more vigorous age and nearer to my own, ye youths;
whom it was befitting to be brandishing arms, and not the thyrsus, 82 and to be covered with helmets, not green leaves? Do be mindful,
I entreat you, of what race you are sprung, and assume the courage
of that dragon, who though but one, destroyed many. He died for
his springs and his stream; but do you conquer for your own fame. He put
the valiant to death; do you expel the feeble foe , and regain
your country’s honor. If the fates forbid Thebes to stand long,
I wish that engines of war 83 and 110 III. 549-577 men should demolish the walls, and that fire and sword should resound. Then 126 III. 551-571 should we be wretched without any fault of our own, and
our fate were to be lamented, but not concealed, and our tears
would be free from shame. But now Thebes will be taken by an unarmed
boy, whom neither wars delight, nor weapons, nor the employment of
horses, but hair wet with myrrh, and effeminate chaplets, and purple,
and gold interwoven with embroidered garments; whom I, indeed, (do you
only stand aside) will presently compel to own that his father is
assumed, and that his sacred rites are fictitious. Has Acrisius 84 courage enough to despise the vain Deity, and to shut the gates of Argos
against his approach; and shall this stranger affright Pentheus with all
Thebes? Go quickly, (this order he gives to his servants), go, and bring
hither in chains the ringleader. Let there be no slothful delay in executing my commands.” His grandfather, 85 Cadmus , Athamas, and the rest of the company
of his friends rebuke him with expostulations, and in vain try to restrain
him. By their admonition he becomes more violent, and by being curbed
his fury is irritated, and is on the increase, and the very restraint
did him injury. So have I beheld a torrent, where nothing obstructed it
in its course, run gently and with moderate noise; but wherever beams
and stones in its way withheld it, it ran foaming and raging, 127 III. 572-594 and more violent from its obstruction. Behold! the servants return, all stained with blood; and when their master inquires where
Bacchus is, they deny that they have seen Bacchus. “But this one,” say
they, “we have taken, who was his attendant and minister in his sacred
rites.” And then they deliver one, who, from the Etrurian nation,
had followed the sacred rites of the Deity, with his hands bound behind
his back. Pentheus looks at him with eyes that anger has made terrible, 111 III. 577-598 and although he can scarcely defer the time of his punishment, he says,
“O wretch , doomed to destruction, and about, by thy death,
to set an example to others, tell me thy name, and the name of thy
parents, and thy country, and why thou dost attend the sacred rites of a
new fashion.” He, void of fear, says, “My name is Acœtes; Mæonia 86 is my
country; my parents were of humble station. My father left me no fields
for the hardy oxen to till, no wool-bearing flocks, nor any herds. He
himself was but poor, and he was wont with line, and hooks, to
deceive the leaping fishes, and to take them with the rod. His trade was
his only possession. When he gave that calling over to me ,
he said, ‘Receive, as the successor and heir of my employment, those
riches which I possess;’ and at his death he left me nothing but the
streams. This one thing alone can I call my patrimony. But soon,
that I might not always be confined to the same rocks, I learned
with a steadying right hand to guide the helm of the ship, and I made observations with my eyes of the showery
Constellation of the Olenian she-goat, 87 and Taygete, 88 128 III. 594-620 and the Hyades, 89 and the Bear, and the quarters of the winds, and the
harbors fit for ships. By chance, as I was making for Delos,
I touched at the coast of the land of Dia, 90 and came up to the
shore by plying the oars on the right side; 112 III. 599-632 and I gave a nimble leap, and lighted upon the wet sand. When the night
was past, and the dawn first began to grow red, I arose and ordered my men to take in fresh water, and I pointed out the way which
led to the stream. I myself, from a lofty eminence, looked around to see what the breeze promised me; and then I called my
companions, and returned to the vessel. ‘Lo! we are here,’ says Opheltes , my
chief mate; and having found, as he thought, a prize in the lonely
fields, he was leading along the shore, a boy with all the
beauty of a girl. He, heavy with wine and sleep, seemed to stagger, and
to follow with difficulty. I examined his dress, his looks, and his
gait, and I saw nothing there which could be taken to be mortal.
I both was sensible of it, and I said to my companions, ‘I am in
doubt what Deity is in that body; but in that body a Deity there is.
Whoever thou art, O be propitious and assist our toils; and pardon
these as well.’ ‘Cease praying for us,’ said Dictys, than whom there was
not another more nimble at climbing to the main-top-yards, and at
sliding down by catching hold of a rope. This Libys, this the
yellow-haired Melanthus, the guardian of the prow, and this Alcimedon approved
of; and Epopeus 91 as well, the cheerer of their spirits, who by his
voice gave both rest and time to the oars; and so did all the
rest; so blind is the greed for booty. ‘However,’ 129 III. 621-648 I said, ‘I will not allow this ship to be damaged by this sacred
freight. Here I have the greatest share of right.’ and I opposed them at
the entrance. “Lycabas, the boldest of all the number, was enraged, who, expelled
from a city of Etruria, was suffering exile as the punishment for a
dreadful murder. 92 He, while I was resisting, seized hold of my throat
with his youthful fist, and shaking me, had thrown me overboard into the
sea, if I had not, although stunned, held fast by grasping a rope. The
impious crew approved of the deed. Then at last Bacchus (for Bacchus it
was), as though his sleep had been broken by the noise, and his sense
was returning into his breast after much wine, said: ‘What are
you doing? What is this noise? Tell me, sailors, 113 III. 632-665 by what means have I come hither? Whither do you intend to carry me?’
‘Lay aside thy fears,’ said Proreus, ‘and tell us what port thou wouldst
wish to reach. Thou shalt stop at the land that thou desirest.’ ‘Direct
your course then to Naxos,’ 93 says Liber, ‘that is my home; it
shall prove a hospitable land for you.’ “In their deceit they swore by the ocean and by all the Deities, that
so it should be; and bade me give sail to the painted ship. Naxos was to
our right; and as I was accordingly setting sail for the
right hand, every one said for himself, ‘What art thou about, madman?
What insanity possesses thee, Acœtes? Stand away to the left.’ The
greater part signified their meaning to me by signs; some
whispered in my ear what they wanted. I was at a loss, and I said,
‘Let some one else take the helm;’ and I withdrew myself from the
execution both of their wickedness, and of my own calling. I was
reviled by them all, and the whole crew muttered reproaches against me. Æthalion, among them, says, ‘As if, forsooth, all our safety
is centred in thee,’ and he himself comes up, and takes my duty; 130 III. 649-678 and leaving Naxos, he steers a different course. Then the God, mocking
them as if he had at last but that moment discovered their knavery,
looks down upon the sea from the crooked stern; and, like one weeping,
he says: ‘These are not the shores, sailors, that you have promised me;
this is not the land desired by me. By what act have I deserved this
treatment? What honor is it to you, if you that are young men,
deceive a mere boy? if you that are many, deceive me, who am but one?’ I had been weeping for some time. The impious
gang laughed at my tears, and beat the sea with hastening oars. Now by
himself do I swear to thee (and no God is there more powerful than he),
that I am relating things to thee as true, as they are beyond all
belief. The ship stood still upon the ocean, no otherwise than if it was
occupying a dry dock. They, wondering at it, persisted in the plying of
their oars; they unfurled their sails, and endeavored to speed onward
with this twofold aid. Ivy impeded the oars, 94 and twined around
them in encircling wreaths; and 114 III. 665-699 clung to the sails with heavy clusters of berries. He himself, having
his head encircled with bunches of grapes, brandished a lance covered
with vine leaves. Around him, tigers and visionary forms of lynxes, and
savage bodies of spotted panthers, were extended. “The men leaped overboard, whether it was madness or fear that caused
this; and first of all , Medon began to grow black with fins, with
a flattened body, and to bend in the curvature of the back-bone. To him
Lycabas said, ‘Into what prodigy art thou changing?’ and, as he spoke,
the opening of his mouth was wide, his nose became crooked, and his
hardened skin received scales upon it. But Libys, while he was
attempting to urge on the resisting oars, saw his hands shrink into a
small compass, and now to be hands no longer, and that now, in
fact , they may be pronounced fins. Another, desirous 131 III. 679-708 to extend his arms to the twisting ropes, had no arms, and becoming
crooked, with a body deprived of limbs, he leaped into the waves; the
end of his tail was hooked, just as the horns of the half-moon are
curved. They flounce about on every side, and bedew the ship with
plenteous spray, and again they emerge, and once more they return
beneath the waves. They sport with all the appearance of a dance,
and toss their sportive bodies, and blow forth the sea, received within
their wide nostrils. Of twenty the moment before (for so many did that
ship carry), I was the only one remaining. The God encouraged me,
frightened and chilled with my body all trembling, and scarcely myself,
saying, ‘Shake off thy fear, and make for Dia.’ Arriving there,
I attended upon the sacred rites of Bacchus, at the kindled
altars.” “We have lent ear to a long story,” 95 says Pentheus, “that our anger
might consume its strength in its tediousness. Servants! drag him
headlong, and send to Stygian night his body, racked with dreadful
tortures.” At once the Etrurian Acœtes, dragged away, is shut up in a
strong prison; and while the cruel instruments of the death that is
ordered, and the iron and the fire are being made ready, the report is
that the doors 115 III. 699-730 opened of their own accord, and that the chains, of their own accord,
slipped from off his arms, no one loosening them. The son of Echion persists: and now he does not command others to go,
but goes himself to where Cithæron, 96 chosen for the celebration of
these sacred rites, was resounding with singing, and the shrill voices
of the votaries of Bacchus. Just as the high-mettled steed neighs, when
the warlike trumpeter gives the alarm with the sounding brass, and
conceives a desire for battle, so did the sky, struck with the
long-drawn howlings, excite Pentheus, and his wrath was rekindled on
hearing the clamor. There was, about the middle 132 III. 708-733 of the mountain, the woods skirting its extremity, a plain free
from trees, and visible on every side. Here his mother was the
first to see him looking on the sacred rites with profane eyes; she
first was moved by a frantic impulse, and she first wounded her son , Pentheus, by hurling her thyrsus, and cried out, “Ho!
come, my two sisters; 97 that boar which, of enormous size, is roaming
amid our fields, that boar I must strike.” All the raging multitude
rushes upon him alone; all collect together, and all follow him, now
trembling, now uttering words less atrocious than before , now
blaming himself, now confessing that he has offended. However, on being wounded, he says, “Give me thy aid, Autonoë, my
aunt; let the ghost of Actæon 98 influence thy feelings.” She knows
not what Actæon means , and tears away his right hand as he is
praying; the other is dragged off by the violence of Ino. The wretched man has now no arms to extend to his mother; but showing
his maimed body, with the limbs torn off, he says, “Look at this, my
mother!” At the sight Agave howls aloud, and tosses her neck, and shakes
her locks in the air; and seizing his head, torn off, with her
blood-stained fingers, she cries out, “Ho! my companions, this victory
is our work!” The wind does not more speedily bear off, from a lofty tree, the
leaves nipped by the cold of autumn, and now adhering 116 III. 730-733 with difficulty, than were the limbs of the man, torn asunder by their
accursed hands. Admonished by such examples, the Ismenian matrons
frequent the new worship, and offer frankincense, and reverence the
sacred altars. EXPLANATION. Cicero mentions two Deities of the name of Bacchus; while other authors
speak of several of that name. The first was the son of 133 Jupiter and Proserpina; the second was the son of the Nile, and the
founder of the city of Nysa, in Arabia; Caprius was the father of the
third. The fourth was the son of the Moon and Jupiter, in honor of whom
the Orphic ceremonies were performed. The fifth was the son of Nisus and
Thione, and the instituter of the Trieterica. Diodorus Siculus mentions
but three of the name of Bacchus; namely, the Indian, surnamed the
bearded Bacchus, who conquered India; the son of Jupiter and Ceres, who
was represented with horns; and the son of Jupiter and Semele, who was
called the Theban Bacchus. The most reasonable opinion seems to be that of Herodotus and Plutarch,
who inform us, that the true Bacchus, and the most ancient of them all,
was born in Egypt, and was originally called Osiris. The worship of that
Divinity passed from Egypt to Greece, where it received great
alterations; and, according to Diodorus Siculus, it was Orpheus who
introduced it, and made those innovations. In gratitude to the family of
Cadmus, from which he had received many favors, he dedicated to Bacchus,
the grandson of Cadmus, those mysteries which had been instituted in
honor of Osiris, whose worship was then but little known in Greece.
Diodorus Siculus says, that as Semele was delivered of Bacchus in the
seventh month, it was reported that Jupiter shut him up in his thigh, to
carry him there the remaining time of gestation. This Fable was probably
founded on the meaning of an equivocal word. The Greek word μηρὸς signifies either ‘a thigh,’ or
‘the hollow of a mountain.’ Thus the Greeks, instead of saying that
Bacchus had been nursed on Mount Nysa, in Arabia, according to the
Egyptian version of the story, published that he had been carried in the
thigh of Jupiter. As Bacchus applied himself to the cultivation of the vine, and taught
his subjects several profitable and necessary arts, he was honored as a
Divinity; and having won the esteem of many neighboring countries, his
worship soon spread. Among his several festivals there was one called
the Trieterica, which was celebrated every three years. In that feast
the Bacchantes carried the figure of the God in a chariot drawn by two
tigers, or panthers; and, crowned with vine leaves, and holding thyrsi
in their hands, they ran in a frantic manner around the chariot, filling
the air with the noise of tambourines and brazen instruments, shouting
‘Evoë. Bacche!’ and calling the God by his several names of Bromius,
Lyæus, Evan, Lenæus, and Sabazius. To this ceremonial, received from the
Egyptians, the Greeks added other ceremonies replete with abominable
licentiousness, and repulsive to common decency. These were often
suppressed by public enactment, but were as often re-established by the
votaries of 117 lewdness and immodesty, and such as found in these festivals a pretext
and opportunity for the commission of the most horrible offences. The story of the unfortunate fate of Pentheus is supposed by the ancient
writers to have been strictly true. Pentheus, the son of Echion and
Agave, the daughter of Cadmus, having succeeded his grandfather in his
kingdom, is supposed, like him, to have opposed those abuses that had
crept into the mysteries of Bacchus, and went to Mount Cithæron for the
purpose of chastising the Bacchantes, who were celebrating his festival;
whereupon, in their 134 frantic madness, the worshippers, among whom were his mother and his
aunt, tore him in pieces. Pausanias , however, says that Pentheus really was a
wicked prince; and he somewhat varies his story, as he tells us that
having got into a tree to overlook the secret ceremonies of the orgies,
Pentheus was discovered by the Bacchantes, who punished his curiosity by
putting him to death. The story of the transformation of the mariners is
supposed by Bochart to have been founded on the adventure of
certain merchants from the coast of Etruria, whose vessel had the figure
of a dolphin at the prow, or rather of the fish called ‘tursio,’
probably the porpoise, or sea-hog. They were probably shipwrecked near
the Isle of Naxos, which was sacred to Bacchus, whose mysteries they had
perhaps neglected, or even despised. On this slender ground, perhaps,
the report spread, that the God himself had destroyed them, as a
punishment for their impiety. 1. Over the whole world. ]—Ver. 6. Apollodorus tells us that
Cadmus lived in Thrace until the death of his mother, Telephassa, who
accompanied him; and that, after her decease, he proceeded to Delphi to
make inquiries of the oracle. 2. Bœotian. ]—Ver. 13. He implies here that Bœotia received its
name from the Greek word βοῦς , ‘an ox’ or ‘cow.’ Other writers say that it was so
called from Bœotus, the son of Neptune and Arne. Some authors also say
that Thebes received its name from the Syrian word ‘Thebe,’ which signified ‘an ox.’ 3. Castalian cave. ]—Ver. 14. Castalius was a fountain at the
foot of Mount Parnassus, and in the vicinity of Delphi. It was sacred to
the Muses. 4. Sacred to Mars. ]—Ver. 32. Euripides says, that the dragon
had been set there by Mars to watch the spot and the neighboring stream.
Other writers say that it was a son of Mars, Dercyllus by name, and that
a Fury, named Tilphosa, was its mother. Ancient history abounds with
stories of enormous serpents. The army of Regulus is said by Pliny the
Elder, to have killed a serpent of enormous size, which obstructed the
passage of the river Bagrada, in Africa. It was 120 feet in length. 5. As large a size. ]—Ver. 44. This description of the enormous
size of the dragon or serpent is inconsistent with what the Poet says in
line 91, where we find Cadmus enabled to pin his enemy against an
oak. 6. With his sting. ]—Ver. 48. He enumerates in this one
instance the various modes by which serpents put their prey to death,
either by means of their sting, or, in the case of the larger kinds of
serpent, by twisting round it, and suffocating it in their folds. 7. Some breathed upon. ]—Ver. 49. It was a prevalent notion
among the ancients, that some serpents had the power of killing their
prey by their poisonous breath. Though some modern commentators on this
passage may be found to affirm the same thing, it is extremely doubtful
if such is the fact. The notion was, perhaps, founded on the power which
certain serpents have of fascinating their prey by the agency of the
eye, and thus depriving it of the means of escape. 8. A huge stone. ]—Ver. 59. ‘Molaris’ here means a stone as
large as a mill-stone, and not a mill-stone itself, for we must remember
that this was an uninhabited country, and consequently a stranger to the
industry of man. 9. His infernal mouth. ]—Ver. 76. ‘Stygio’ means ‘pestilential
as the exhalations of the marshes of Styx.’ 10. Form of a dragon. ]—Ver. 98. This came to pass when, having
been expelled from his dominions by Zethus and Amphion, he retired to
Illyria, and was there transformed into a serpent, a fate which was
shared by his wife Hermione. 11. With painted cones. ]—Ver. 108. The ‘conus’ was the conical
part of the helmet into which the crest of variegated feathers was
inserted. 12. When the curtains. ]—Ver. 111. The ‘Siparium’ was a piece of
tapestry stretched on a frame, and, rising before the stage, answered
the same purpose as the curtain or drop-scene with us, in concealing the
stage till the actors appeared. Instead of drawing up this curtain to
discover the stage and actors, according to our present practice, it was
depressed when the play began, and fell beneath the level of the stage;
whence ‘aulæa premuntur,’ ‘the curtain is dropped,’ meant that the play
had commenced. When the performance was finished, this was raised again
gradually from the foot of the stage; therefore ‘aulæa tolluntur,’ ‘the
curtain is raised,’ would mean that the play had finished. From the
present passage we learn, that in drawing it up from the stage, the
curtain was gradually displayed, the unfolding taking place, perhaps,
below the boards, so that the heads of the figures rose first, until the
whole form appeared in full with the feet resting on the stage, when the
‘siparium’ was fully drawn up. From a passage in Virgil’s Georgics (book
iii. l. 25), we learn that the figures of Britons (whose country had
then lately been the scene of new conquests) were woven on the canvas of
the ‘siparium,’ having their arms in the attitude of lifting the
curtain. 13. Echion. ]—Ver. 126. The names of the others were Udeus,
Chthonius, Hyperenor, and Pelor, according to Apollodorus. To these some
added Creon, as a sixth. 14. Mars and Venus. ]—Ver. 132. The wife of Cadmus was Hermione,
or Harmonia, who was said to have been the daughter of Mars and Venus.
The Deities honored the nuptials with their presence, and presented
marriage gifts, while the Muses and the Graces celebrated the festivity
with hymns of their own composition. 15. So many sons. ]—Ver. 134. Apollodorus, Hyginus, and others,
say that Cadmus had but one son, Polydorus. If so, ‘tot,’ ‘so many,’
must here refer to the number of his daughters and grandchildren. His
daughters were four in number, Autonoë, Ino, Semele, and Agave. Ino
married Athamas, Autonoë Aristæus, Agave Echion, while Semele captivated
Jupiter. The most famous of the grandsons of Cadmus were Bacchus,
Melicerta, Pentheus, and Actæon. 16. Before his death. ]—Ver. 135. This was the famous remark of
Solon to Crœsus, when he was the master of the opulent and flourishing
kingdom of Lydia, and seemed so firmly settled on his throne, that there
was no probability of any interruption of his happiness. Falling into
the hands of Cyrus the Persian, and being condemned to be burnt alive,
he recollected this wise saying of Solon, and by that means saved his
life, as we are told by Herodotus, who relates the story at length.
Euripides has a similar passage in his Troades, line 510. 17. The Hyantian youth. ]—Ver. 147. Actæon is thus called, as
being a Bœotian. The Hyantes were the ancient or aboriginal inhabitants
of Bœotia. 18. Gargaphie. ]—Ver. 156. Gargaphie, or Gargaphia, was a valley
situate near Platæa, having a fountain of the same name. 19. Crocale. ]—Ver. 169. So called, perhaps, from κεκρύφαλος , an ornament for the
head, being a coif, band, or fillet of network for the hair called in
Latin ‘reticulum,’ by which name her office is denoted. The handmaid,
whose duty it was to attend to the hair, held the highest rank in
ancient times among the domestics. 20. Nephele. ]—Ver. 171. From the Greek word νεφέλη , ‘a cloud.’ 21. Hyale. ]—Ver. 171. This is from ὕαλος , ‘glass,’ the name signifying ‘glassy,’
‘pellucid.’ The very name calls to mind Milton’s line in his
Comus— ‘Under the glassy, cool, translucent wave.’ 22. Rhanis. ]—Ver. 171. This name is adapted from the Greek verb ῥαίνω , ‘to sprinkle.’ 23. Psecas. ]—Ver. 172. From the Greek ψεκὰς , ‘a dew-drop.’ 24. Phyale . ]—Ver. 172. This is from the Greek φιαλὴ , ‘an urn.’ 25. Took up water. ]—Ver. 189. The ceremonial of sprinkling
previous to the transformation seems not to have been neglected any more
by the offended Goddesses of the classical Mythology, than by the
intriguing enchantresses of the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments; as the
unfortunate Beder, when under the displeasure of the vicious queen Labè,
experienced to his great inconvenience. The love for the supernatural,
combined with an anxious desire to attribute its operations to material
and visible agencies, forms one of the most singular features of the
human character. 26. Autonoëian. ]—Ver. 198. Autonoë was the daughter of Cadmus
and Hermione, or Harmonia, and the wife of Aristæus, by whom she was the
mother of Actæon. We may here remark, that in one of his satires, Lucian
introduces Juno as saying to Diana, that she had let loose his dogs on
Actæon, for fear lest, having seen her naked, he should divulge the
deformity of her person. 27. Melampus. ]—Ver. 206. These names are all from the Greek,
and are interesting, as showing the epithets by which the ancients
called their dogs. The pack of Actæon is said to have consisted of fifty
dogs. Their names were preserved by several Greek poets, from whom
Apollodorus copied them; but the greater part of his list has perished,
and what remains is in a very corrupt state. Hyginus has preserved two
lists, the first of which contains thirty-nine names, most of which are
similar to those here given by Ovid, and in almost the same order; while
the second contains thirty-six names, different from those here given.
Æschylus has named but four of them, and Ovid here names thirty-six.
Crete, Arcadia, and Laconia produced the most valuable hounds. Melampus,
‘Black-foot,’ is from the Greek words μέλας , ‘black,’ and ποῦς , ‘a foot.’ 28. Ichnobates. ]—Ver. 207. ‘Tracer.’ From the Greek ἰχνὸς , ‘a footstep,’ and βαίνω , ‘to go.’ 29. Pamphagus. ]—Ver. 210. ‘Glutton.’ From πᾶν , ‘all,’ and φάγω , ‘to eat.’ 30. Dorcæus. ]—Ver. 210. ‘Quicksight.’ From δέρκω , ‘to see.’ 31. Oribasus. ]—Ver. 210. ‘Ranger.’ From ὄρος , ‘a mountain,’ and βαίνω , ‘to go.’ 32. Nebrophonus. ]—Ver. 211. ‘Kill-buck.’ From νεβρὸς , ‘a fawn,’ and φονέω , ‘to kill.’ 33. Lælaps. ]—Ver. 211. ‘Tempest.’ So called from its swiftness
and power, λαίλαψ ,
signifying ‘a whirlwind.’ 34. Theron. ]—Ver. 211. ‘Hunter.’ From the Greek, θερεύω , ‘to trace,’ or ‘hunt.’ 35. Pterelas. ]—Ver. 212. ‘Wing.’ ‘Swift-footed,’ from πτερὸν , ‘a wing,’ and ἐλαύνω , ‘to drive onward.’ 36. Agre. ]—Ver. 212. ‘Catcher.’ ‘Quick-scented,’ from ἄγρα , ‘hunting,’ or ‘the
chase.’ 37. Hylæus. ]—Ver. 213. ‘Woodger,’ or ‘Wood-ranger;’ the Greek ὕλη , signifying ‘a
wood.’ 38. Nape. ]—Ver. 214. ‘Forester.’ A ‘forest,’ or ‘wood,’ being
in Greek, νάπη . 39. Pœmenis . ]—Ver. 215. ‘Shepherdess,’ From the
Greek ποίμενις , ‘a
shepherdess.’ 40. Harpyia. ]—Ver. 215. ‘Ravener.’ From the Greek word ἅρπυια , ‘a harpy,’ or ‘ravenous
bird.’ 41. Ladon. ]—Ver. 216. This dog takes its name from Ladon,
a river of Sicyon, a territory on the shores of the gulf of
Corinth. 42. Dromas. ]—Ver. 217. ‘Runner.’ From the Greek δρόμος , ‘a race.’ 43. Canace. ]—Ver. 217. ‘Barker.’ The word καναχὴ , signifies ‘a noise,’ or ‘din.’ 44. Sticte. ]—Ver. 217. ‘Spot.’ So called from the variety of
her colors, as στικτὸς ,
signifies ‘diversified with various spots,’ from στίζω , ‘to vary with spots.’ ‘Tigris’ means
‘Tiger.’ 45. Alce. ]—Ver. 217. ‘Strong.’ From the Greek ἀλκὴ ‘strength.’ 46. Leucon. ]—Ver. 218. ‘White.’ From λευκὸς , ‘white.’ 47. Asbolus. ]—Ver. 218. ‘Soot,’ or ‘Smut.’ From the Greek ἄσβολος , ‘soot.’ 48. Lacon. ]—Ver. 219. From his native country, Laconia. 49. Aëllo. ]—Ver. 219. ‘Storm.’ From ἄελλα , ‘a tempest.’ 50. Thoüs. ]—Ver. 220. ‘Swift.’ From θοὸς , ‘swift.’
Pliny the Elder states, that ‘thos’ was the name of a kind of wolf, of
larger make, and more active in springing than the common wolf. He says
that it is of inoffensive habits towards man; but that it lives by prey,
and is hairy in winter, but without hair in summer. It is supposed by
some that he alludes to the jackal. Perhaps, from this animal, the dog
here mentioned derived his name. 51. Lycisca. ]—Ver. 220. ‘Wolf.’ From the diminutive of the
Greek word λύκος , ‘a wolf.’
Virgil uses ‘Lycisca’ as the name of a dog, in his Eclogues. 52. Harpalus. ]—Ver. 222. ‘Snap.’ From ἁρπάζω , ‘to snatch,’ or ‘plunder.’ 53. Melaneus. ]—Ver. 222. ‘Black-coat.’ From the Greek, μέλας , ‘black.’ 54. Lachne. ]—Ver. 222. ‘Stickle.’ From the Greek work λαχνὴ , signifying ‘thickness of
the hair.’ 55. Labros. ]—Ver. 224. ‘Worrier.’ From the Greek λάβρος , ‘greedy.’ Dicte was a mountain
of Crete; whence the word ‘Dictæan’ is often employed to signify
‘Cretan.’ 56. Agriodos. ]—Ver. 224 . ‘Wild-tooth.’ From ἄγριος , ‘wild,’ and ὀδοῦς , ‘a tooth.’ 57. Hylactor. ]—Ver. 224. ‘Babbler.’ From the Greek word ὑλακτέω , signifying ‘to
bark.’ 58. Melanchætes. ]—Ver. 232. ‘Black-hair.’ From the μέλας , ‘black,’ and χαιτὴ , ‘mane.’ 59. Theridamas. ]—Ver. 233. ‘Kilham.’ From θὴρ , ‘a wild beast,’ and δαμάω , ‘to subdue.’ 60. Oresitrophus. ]—Ver. 223. ‘Rover.’ From ὄρος ‘a mountain,’ and τρέφω ‘to nourish.’ 61. I will take care. ]—Ver. 271. ‘Faxo,’ ‘I will make,’ is
sometimes used by the best authors for ‘fecero;’ and ‘faxim’ for
‘faciam,’ or ‘fecerim.’ 62. Beroë. ]—Ver. 278. Iris, in the fifth book of the Æneid (l. 620 ),
assumes the form of another Beroë; and a third person of that name is
mentioned in the fourth book of the Georgics, l. 34. 63. Epidaurian. ]—Ver. 278. Epidaurus was a famous city of
Argolis, in Peloponnesus, famous for its temple, dedicated to the
worship of Æsculapius, who was the tutelary Divinity of that city. 64. Could not endure. ]—Ver. 308. ‘Corpus mortale tumultus Non
tulit æthereos,’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘her mortal body could not bear
this æthereal bustle.’ 65. The Nyseian Nymphs. ]—Ver. 314. Nysa was the name of a city
and mountain of Arabia, or India. The tradition was, that there the
Nyseian Nymphs, whose names were Cysseis, Nysa, Erato, Eryphia, Bromia,
and Polyhymnia, brought up Bacchus. The cave where he was concealed from
the fury of Juno, was said to have had two entrances, from which
circumstance Bacchus received the epithet of Dithyrites. Servius, in his
commentary on the sixth Eclogue of Virgil (l. 15), says that Nysa was
the name of the female that nursed Bacchus. Hyginus also speaks of her
as being the daughter of Oceanus. From the name ‘Nysa,’ Bacchus
received, in part, his Greek name ‘Dionysus.’ 66. Twice born. ]—Ver. 318. Clarke thus translates and explains
this line—‘They tell you, that Jupiter well drenched;’ i.e. ‘fuddled with nectar,’ etc. 67. Aonia. ]—Ver. 339. Aonia was a mountainous district of
Bœotia, so called from Aon, the son of Neptune, who reigned there. The
name is often used to signify the whole of Bœotia. 68. Liriope. ]—Ver. 342. She was the daughter of Oceanus and
Tethys, and was the mother of the youth Narcissus, by the river
Cephisus. Her name is derived from the Greek λείριον , ‘a
lily.’ 69. Many a youth. ]—Ver. 353. Clarke translates ‘multi juvenes,’
‘many young fellows.’ 70. Used to detain. ]—Ver. 364. Clarke translates ‘Illa Deam
longo prudens sermone tenebat Dum fugerent Nymphæ,’ ‘She designedly
detained the Goddess with some long-winded discourse or other till the
Nymphs ran away.’ He translates ‘garrula,’ in line 360, ‘the prattling
hussy.’ 71. Narcissus. ]—Ver. 370. This name is from the Greek word ναρκᾷν , ‘to fade away,’
which was characteristic of the youth’s career, and of the duration of
the flower. 72. Sulphur spread around. ]—Ver. 372. These lines show, that it
was the custom of the ancients to place sulphur on the ends of their
torches, to make them ignite the more readily, in the same manner as the
matches of the present day are tipped with that mineral. 73. Rushing from the woods. ]—Ver. 388. ‘Egressaque sylvis.’
Clarke renders, ‘and bouncing out of the wood.’ 74. Rhamnusia. ]—Ver. 406. Nemesis, the Goddess of Retribution,
and the avenger of crime, was the daughter of Jupiter. She had a famous
temple at Rhamnus, one of the ‘pagi,’ or boroughs of Athens. Her statue
was there, carved by Phidias out of the marble which the Persians
brought into Greece for the purpose of making a statue of Victory out of
it, and which was thus appropriately devoted to the Goddess of
Retribution. This statue wore a crown, and had wings, and holding a
spear of ash in the right hand, it was seated on a stag. 75. Parian marble. ]—Ver. 419. Paros was an island in the Ægean
sea, one of the Cyclades; it was famous for the valuable quality of its
marble, which was especially used for the purpose of making statues of
the Gods. 76. Regard for food. ]—Ver. 437. ‘Cereris.’ The name of the
Goddess of corn is here used instead of bread itself. 77. Laid their hair. ]—Ver. 506. It was the custom among the
ancients for females, when lamenting the dead, not only to cut off their
hair, but to lay it on the body, when extended upon the funeral
pile. 78. Cities of Achaia. ]—Ver. 511. Achaia was properly the name
of a part of Peloponnesus, on the gulf of Corinth; but the name is very
frequently applied to the whole of Greece. 79. Pentheus. ]—Ver. 513. He was the son of Echion and Agave,
the daughter of Cadmus. 80. Warlike men. ]—Ver. 531. ‘Mavortia.’ Mavors was a name of
Mars, frequently used by the poets. The Thebans were ‘proles Mavortia,’
as being sprung from the teeth of the dragon, who was said to be a son
of Mars. 81. Tambourines. ]—Ver. 537. ‘Tympana.’ These instruments, among
the ancients, were of various kinds. Some resembled the modern
tambourine; while others presented a flat circular disk on the upper
surface, and swelled out beneath, like the kettle-drum of the present
day. They were covered with the hides of oxen, or of asses, and were
beaten either with a stick or the hand. They were especially used in the
rites of Bacchus, and of Cybele. 82. The thyrsus. ]—Ver. 542. The thyrsus was a long staff,
carried by Bacchus, and by the Satyrs and Bacchanalians engaged in the
worship of the God of the grape. It was sometimes terminated by the
apple of the pine, or fir-cone, the fir-tree being esteemed sacred to
Bacchus, from the turpentine flowing therefrom and its apples being used
in making wine. It is, however, frequently represented as terminating in
a knot of ivy, or vine leaves, with grapes or berries arranged in a
conical form. Sometimes, also, a white fillet was tied to the pole
just below the head. We learn from Diodorus Siculus, and Macrobius, that
Bacchus converted the thyrsi carried by himself and his followers into
weapons, by concealing an iron point in the head of leaves. A wound
with its point was supposed to produce madness. 83. Engines of war. ]—Ver. 549. ‘Tormenta.’ These were the
larger engines of destruction used in ancient warfare. They were so
called from the verb ‘torqueo,’ ‘to twist,’ from their being formed by
the twisting of hair, fibre, or strips of leather. The different sorts
were called ‘balistæ’ and ‘catapultæ.’ The former were used to impel
stones; the latter, darts and arrows. In sieges, the ‘Aries,’ or
‘battering ram,’ which received its name from having an iron head
resembling that of a ram, was employed in destroying the lower part of
the wall, while the ‘balista’ was overthrowing the battlements, and the
‘catapulta’ was employed to shoot any of the besieged who appeared
between them. The ‘balistæ’ and ‘catapultæ’ were divided into the
‘greater’ and the ‘less.’ When New Carthage, the arsenal of the
Carthaginians, was taken, according to Livy (b. xxvi. c. 47), there were
found in it 120 large and 281 small catapultæ, and twenty-three large
and fifty-two small balistæ. The various kinds of ‘tormenta’ are said to
have been introduced about the time of Alexander the Great. If so, Ovid
must here be committing an anachronism, in making Pentheus speak of
‘tormenta,’ who lived so many ages before that time. To commit
anachronisms with impunity seems, however, to be the poet’s privilege,
from Ovid downwards to our Shakspere, where he makes Falstaff talk
familiarly of the West Indies. We find the dictionaries giving
‘tormentum’ as the Latin word for ‘cannon;’ so that in this case we may
say not that ‘necessity is the mother of invention,’ but rather that she
is ‘the parent of anachronism.’ 84. Acrisius. ]—Ver. 559. He was a king of Argos, the son of
Abas, and the father of Danaë. He refused, and probably with justice, to
admit Bacchus or his rites within the gates of his city. 85. His grandfather. ]—Ver. 563. Athamas was the son of Æolus,
and being the husband of Ino, was the son-in-law of Cadmus; who being
the father of Agave, the mother of Pentheus, is the grandfather
mentioned in the present line. 86. Mæonia. ]—Ver. 583. Colonists were said to have proceeded
from Lydia, or Mæonia, to the coasts of Etruria. Bacchus assumes the
name of Acœtes, as corresponding to the Greek epithet ἀκοίτης , ‘watchful,’ or ‘sleepless;’ which ought to be
the characteristic of the careful ‘pilot,’ or ‘helmsman.’ 87. Olenian she-goat. ]—Ver. 594. Amalthea, the goat that
suckled Jupiter, is called Olenian, either because she was reared in
Olenus, a city of Bœotia, or because she was placed as a
Constellation between the arms, ὠλέναι , of the
Constellation Auriga, or the Charioteer. The rising and setting of this
Constellation were supposed to produce showers. 88. Taygete. ]—Ver. 594. She was one of the Pleiades, the
daughters of Atlas, who were placed among the Constellations. 89. Hyades. ]—Ver. 594. These were the Dodonides, or nurses of
Bacchus, whom Jupiter, as a mark of his favor, placed in the number of the Constellations. Their name is derived from ὕειν , ‘to rain.’ 90. Dia. ]—Ver. 596. This was another name of the Isle of Naxos.
Gierig thinks that the reading here is neither ‘Diæ’ nor ‘Chiæ,’ which
are the two common readings; as the situation of neither the Isle of
Naxos nor that of Chios, would suit the course of the ship, as stated in
the text. He thinks that the Isle of Ceos, or Cea, is meant, which
Ptolemy calls Κια , and which
he thinks ought here to be written ‘Ciæ.’ 91. Epopeus. ]—Ver. 619. He was the κελεύστης , ‘pausarius,’ or keeper of time for the
rowers. 92. A dreadful murder. ]—Ver. 626. They seem to have been
composed of much the same kind of lawless materials that formed the
daring crews of the buccanier Morgan and Captain Kydd in more recent
times. 93. Naxos. ]—Ver. 636. This was the most famous island of the
group of the Cyclades. 94. Ivy impeded the oars. ]—Ver. 664. Hyginus tells us, that
Bacchus changed the oars into thyrsi, the sails into clusters of grapes,
and the rigging into ivy branches. In the Homeric hymn on this subject
we find the ship flowing with wine, vines growing on the sails, ivy
twining round the mast, and the benches wreathed with chaplets. 95. To a long story. ]—Ver. 692. Clarke renders this line, ‘We
have lent our ears to a long tale of a tub.’ 96. Cithæron. ]—Ver. 702. This was a mountain of Bœotia, famous
for the orgies of Bacchus there celebrated. 97. My two sisters. ]—Ver. 713. These were Ino and Autonoë. 98. Ghost of Actæon. ]—Ver. 720. He appeals to Autonoë, the
mother of Actæon, to remember the sad fate of her own son, and to show
him some mercy; but in vain: for, as one commentator on the passage
says, ‘Drunkenness had taken away both her reason and her memory.’ Supplementary Note ( added by transcriber ) A. grief is taking away : Ovid III.469 “adĭmit”. Translating “has
taken” would require the metrically impossible variant “adēmit”. THE METAMORPHOSES Book IV-VII. Fable descriptions are taken from the translator’s
Synopses. Book IV Fable I : The daughters of Minyas. Pyramus
and Thisbe. Fable II : Mars and Venus. The Sun and
Leucothoë. Fable III : Clytie buried alive. Fable IV : Daphnis; Scython; Celmus;
Crocus and Smilax; the Curetes. Fable V : Salmacis and Hermaphroditus. Fable VI : The daughters of Minyas. Fable VII : Athamas and Ino. Fable VIII : Cadmus leaves Thebes. Fable IX : Perseus kills Medusa. Fable X : Perseus and Andromeda. Medusa’s
hair. Book V Fable I : Perseus’s marriage feast. Fable II : Minerva and the Muses. Fable III : The song of Calliope. Fable IV : Pluto and Proserpina. Fable V : Ceres searches for
Proserpina. Fable VI : Arethusa is changed into a
fountain. Fable VII : Lyncus is changed into a
lynx; the Pierides are changed into magpies. Book VI Fable I : Arachne and Minerva. Fable II : Niobe and her children. Fable III : Latona and the frogs. Fable IV : Marsyas is flayed alive. Fable V : Tereus, Progne and
Philomela. Fable VI : Progne’s son Itys. Fable VII : Boreas and Orithyïa. Book VII Fable I : Jason, the Golden Fleece and
Medea. Fable II : Medea restores Æson to youth.
The daughters of Pelias. Fable III : Medea in Corinth. Fable IV : Hercules chains Cerberus.
Theseus and Medea. Fable V : Minos at Ægina. Cephalus at
Ægina. Fable VI : The Myrmidons. Fable VII : Procris becomes a huntress.
Œdipus and the Sphinx. Fable VIII : Cephalus accidentally
kills Procris. 135 118 BOOK THE FOURTH. FABLE I. The daughters of Minyas, instead of
celebrating the festival of Bacchus, apply themselves to other pursuits
during the ceremonies; and among several narratives which they relate to
pass away the time, they divert themselves with the story of the
adventures of Pyramus and Thisbe. These lovers having made an
appointment to meet without the walls of Babylon, Thisbe arrives first;
but at the sight of a lioness, she runs to hide herself in a cave, and
in her alarm, drops her veil. Pyramus, arriving soon after, finds the
veil of his mistress stained with blood; and believing her to be dead,
kills himself with his own sword. Thisbe returns from the cave; and
finding Pyramus weltering in his blood, she plunges the same fatal
weapon into her own breast. But Alcithoë, the daughter of
Minyas, 1 does not think that the rites 2 of the God ought to be
received; but still, in her rashness, denies that Bacchus is the progeny
of Jupiter; and she has her sisters 3 as partners in her impiety. The priest had ordered both mistresses and maids, laying aside their
employments, to have their breasts 136 IV. 6-19 covered with skins, and to loosen the fillets of their hair, and to
put garlands 119 IV. 7-22 on their locks, and to take the verdant thyrsi in their hands; and had
prophesied that severe would be the resentment of the Deity, if affronted. Both matrons and new-married women obey, and lay aside their
webs and work-baskets, 4 and their tasks unfinished; and offer
frankincense, and invoke both Bacchus and Bromius, 5 and Lyæus, 6 and the son
of the Flames, and the Twice-Born, and the only one that had two
mothers. 7 To these is added the name of Nyseus, and the
unshorn Thyoneus, 8 and with Lenæus, 9 the planter of the genial grape, and
Nyctelius, 10 and father Eleleus, and Iacchus, 11 and Evan, 12 and a
great many other names, which thou, Liber, hast besides, throughout the
nations of Greece. For thine is youth everlasting; thou art a boy to all
time, thou art beheld as the most beauteous of all in high
heaven; 137 IV. 20-42 thou hast the features of a virgin, when thou standest without thy
horns. By thee the East was conquered, as far as where swarthy India is
bounded by the remote Ganges. Thou 120 IV. 23-46 God , worthy of our veneration, didst smite Pentheus, and the
axe-bearing Lycurgus, 13 sacrilegious mortals ; thou didst hurl
the bodies of the Etrurians into the sea. Thou controllest the neck of
the lynxes yoked to thy chariot, graced with the painted reins. The
Bacchanals and the Satyrs follow thee ; the drunken old man, too, Silenus , who supports his reeling limbs with a staff, and sticks
by no means very fast to his bending ass. And wherever thou goest, the
shouts of youths, and together the voices of women, and tambourines
beaten with the hands, and hollow cymbals resound, and the box-wood pipe , with its long bore. The Ismenian matrons ask thee to show
thyself mild and propitious, and celebrate thy sacred rites as
prescribed. The daughters of Minyas alone, within doors, interrupting the
festival with unseasonable labor, 14 are either carding wool, or twirling
the threads with their fingers, or are plying at the web, and keeping
the handmaids to their work. One of them, as she is drawing the
thread with her smooth thumb, says, “While others are idling, and
thronging to these fanciful rites, let us, whom Pallas,
a better Deity, occupies, alleviate the useful toil of our hands
with varying discourse; and let us relate by turns to our disengaged
ears, for the general amusement , something each in our turn, that
will not permit the time to seem long.” They approve of what she says,
and her sisters bid her to be the first to tell her story. 138 IV. 43-58 She considers which of many she shall tell (for she knows many a one),
and she is in doubt whether she shall tell of thee, Babylonian
Dercetis, 15 whom the people of Palestine 16 121 IV. 46-66 believe to inhabit the pools, with thy changed form, scales covering thy
limbs; or rather how her daughter, taking wings, passed her latter years
in whitened turrets; or how a Naiad, 17 by charms and too potent herbs,
changed the bodies of the young men into silent fishes, until she
suffered the same herself. Or how the tree which bore white fruit formerly , now bears it of purple hue, from the contact of blood.
This story pleases her; this, because it was no common tale, she
began in manner such as this, while the wool followed the
thread:— “Pyramus and Thisbe, the one the most beauteous of youths, 18 the
other preferred before all the damsels that the East contained,
lived in adjoining houses; where Semiramis is said to have surrounded
her lofty city 19 with walls of brick. 20 The nearness caused their 139 IV. 59-88 first acquaintance, and their first advances in love ; with time
their affection increased. They would have united themselves, too, by
the tie of marriage, but their fathers forbade it. A thing which
they could not forbid, they were both inflamed, with minds equally
captivated. There is no one acquainted with it; by nods and signs, they
hold converse. And the more the fire is smothered, the more, when so smothered, does it burn. The party-wall, common to the two
houses, was cleft by a small chink, which it had got formerly, when it
was 122 IV. 66-99 built. This defect, remarked by no one for so many ages, you lovers
(what does not love perceive?) first found one, and you made it a
passage for your voices, and the accents of love used to pass through it
in safety, with the gentlest murmur. Oftentimes, after they had taken
their stations, Thisbe on one side, and Pyramus on the other, and
the breath of their mouths had been mutually caught by turns,
they used to say, ‘Envious wall, why dost thou stand in the way of
lovers? what great matter were it, for thee to suffer us to be joined
with our entire bodies? Or if that is too much, that, at least, thou
shouldst open, for the exchange of kisses. Nor are we ungrateful; we
confess that we are indebted to thee, that a passage has been given for
our words to our loving ears .’ Having said this much, in vain, on their
respective sides, about night they said, ‘Farewell’; and gave those
kisses each on their own side, which did not reach the other side. ”The following morning had removed the fires of the night, and the
Sun, with its rays, had dried the grass wet with rime, when they met
together at the wonted spot. Then, first complaining much in low
murmurs, they determine , in the silent night, to try to deceive
their keepers, and to steal out of doors; and when they have left the
house, to quit the buildings of the city as well: but that they may not
have to wander, roaming in the open fields, to meet at the tomb of
Ninus, 21 and to 140 IV. 89-117 conceal themselves beneath the shade of a tree. There was there a lofty
mulberry tree, very full of snow-white fruit, quite close to a cold
spring. The arrangement suits them; and the light, seeming to
depart but slowly, is buried in the waters, and from the same
waters the night arises. The clever Thisbe, turning the hinge, gets out
in the dark, and deceives her attendants , and, having covered her
face, arrives at the tomb, and sits down under the tree agreed upon;
love made her bold. Lo! a lioness approaches, having her foaming
jaws besmeared with the recent slaughter of oxen, about to quench her
thirst with the water of the neighboring spring. The Babylonian 123 IV. 99-130 Thisbe sees her at a distance, by the rays of the moon, and with a
trembling foot she flies to a dark cave; and, while she flies, her veil
falling from her back, she leaves it behind. When the savage lioness has
quenched her thirst with plenteous water, as she is returning into the
woods, she tears the thin covering, found by chance without Thisbe
herself, with her blood-stained mouth. “Pyramus, going out later than Thisbe , saw the evident
footmarks of a wild beast, in the deep dust, and grew pale all over his
face. But, as soon as he found her veil, as well, dyed with blood, he
said: ‘One night will be the ruin of two lovers, of whom she was the
most deserving of a long life. My soul is guilty; ’tis I that have
destroyed thee, much to be lamented; who bade thee to come by night to
places full of terror, and came not hither first. O, whatever lions
are lurking beneath this rock, tear my body in pieces, and devour my
accursed entrails with ruthless jaws. But it is the part of a coward to
wish for death.’ He takes up the veil of Thisbe, and he takes it with
himself to the shade of the tree agreed on, and, after he has bestowed
tears on the well-known garment, he gives kisses to the same , 141 IV. 118-141 and he says, ‘Receive, now, a draught of my blood as well!’ and then
plunges the sword, with which he is girt, into his bowels; and without
delay, as he is dying, he draws it out of the warm wound. As he falls on
his back upon the ground, the blood spurts forth on high, not otherwise
than as when a pipe is burst on the lead decaying, 22 and shoots
out afar the liquid water from the hissing flaw, and cleaves the air
with its jet. The fruit of the tree, by the sprinkling of the blood, are
changed to a dark tint, and the root, soaked with the gore, tints the
hanging mulberries with a purple hue. Behold! not yet having banished
her fear, Thisbe returns, that she may not disappoint her lover,
and seeks for the youth both with her eyes and her affection, and longs
to tell him how great dangers 124 IV. 130-160 she has escaped. And when she observes the spot, and the altered
appearance of the tree, she doubts if it is the same, so uncertain does
the color of the fruit make her. While she is in doubt, she sees
palpitating limbs throbbing upon the bloody ground; she draws back her
foot, and having her face paler than box-wood, 23 she shudders like the
sea, which trembles 24 when its surface is skimmed by a gentle breeze.
But, after pausing a time, she had recognized her own lover, she smote
her arms, undeserving of such usage , and tearing her hair, and
embracing the much-loved body, she filled the gashes with her tears, and
mingled her tokens of sorrow 142 IV. 142-166 with his blood; and imprinting kisses on his cold features, she
exclaimed, ‘Pyramus! what disaster has taken thee away from me? Pyramus!
answer me; ’tis thy own Thisbe, dearest, that calls thee; hear me, and
raise thy prostrate features.’ “At the name of Thisbe, Pyramus raised his eyes, now heavy with
death, and, after he had seen her, he closed them again. After she had
perceived her own garment, and beheld, too, the ivory sheath 25 without its sword, she said, ‘’Tis thy own hand, and love, that has
destroyed thee, ill-fated youth ! I, too, have a hand bold enough for this one purpose; I have love as well; this shall
give me strength for the wound. I will follow thee in thy death,
and I shall be called the most unhappy cause and companion of thy fate, and thou
who, alas! couldst be torn from me by death alone, shalt not be able,
even by death, to be torn from me. And you, O most wretched parents
of mine and his, be but prevailed upon, in this one thing, by the
entreaties of us both, that you will not deny those whom their constant
love and whom their last moments have joined, to be buried in the
same tomb. But thou, O tree, which now with thy boughs 125 IV. 160-166 dost overshadow the luckless body of but one, art fated soon to
cover those of two. Retain a token of this our fate, and
ever bear fruit black and suited for mourning, as a memorial of the
blood of us two.’ Thus she said; and having fixed the point under
the lower part of her breast, she fell upon the sword, which still was
reeking with his blood. “Her prayers, however, moved the Gods, and moved their
parents. For the color of the fruit, when it has fully ripened, is
black; 26 and what was left of them, from the funeral pile,
reposed in the same urn.” 143 EXPLANATION. It is pretty clear, as we have already seen, that the establishment of
the worship of Bacchus in Greece met with great opposition, and that his
priests and devotees published several miracles and prodigies, the more
easily to influence the minds of their fellow-men. Thus, the daughters
of Minyas are said to have been changed into bats, solely because they
neglected to join in the orgies of that God; when, probably, the fact
was, that they were either secretly despatched, or were forced to fly
for their lives; and their absence was accounted for to the ignorant and
credulous, by the invention of this Fable. The story of Dercetis, as
related by Diodorus Siculus, Pliny, and Herodotus, is, that having
offended Venus, that Goddess caused her to fall in love with a young
man, by whom she had a daughter. In despair at her misfortune, she
killed her lover, and exposed her child, and afterwards drowned herself.
The Syrians, lamenting her fate, built a temple near where she was
drowned, and honored her as a Goddess. They stated that she was turned
into a fish, and they there represented her under the figure of a woman
down to the waist, and of a fish thence downwards. They also abstained
from eating fish; though they offered them to her in sacrifice, and
suspended gilded ones in her temple. Selden, in his Treatise on the
Syrian Gods, suggests that the story of Dercetis, or Atergatis, was
founded on the figure and worship of Dagon, the God of the Philistines,
who was represented under the figure of a fish; and that the name of
Atergatis is a corruption of ‘Adir Dagon,’ ‘a great fish,’ which is not
at all improbable. The same author supposes that Dercetis was originally
the same Deity with Venus, Astarte, Minerva, Juno, Isis, and the Moon;
and that she was worshipped under the name of Mylitta by the Assyrians,
and as Alilac by the Arabians. Lucian tells us, that Dercetis was
reported to have been the mother of Semiramis. Ovid and Hyginus are the only authors that make mention of the story of
Pyramus and Thisbe, and both agree in making Babylon the scene of it. It
seems to be rather intended as a moral tale, than to have been built
upon any actual circumstance. It affords a lesson to youth not to enter
rashly 126 IV. 167-186 into engagements: and to parents not to pursue, too rigorously, the
gratification of their own resentment, but rather to consult the
inclination of their children, when not likely to be productive of
unhappiness at a future period. The reader cannot fail to call to mind the admirable travesty of this
story by Shakspere, in the ‘Midsummer Night’s Dream.’ 144 IV. 167-186 FABLE II. The Sun discovers to Vulcan the
intrigue between Mars and Venus, and then, himself, falls in love
with Leucothoë. Venus, in revenge for the discovery, resolves to make
his amours unfortunate. Here she ended; and there was but a short time betwixt, and then Leuconoë began 27 to
speak. Her sisters held their peace. “Love has captivated even this Sun,
who rules all things by his æthereal light. I will relate the loves
of the Sun. This God is supposed to have been the first to see the
adultery of Venus with Mars; this God is the first to see everything. He
was grieved at what was done, and showed to the husband, the son of
Juno, 28 the wrong done to his bed, and the place of the
intrigue. Both his senses, and the work which his skilful right hand was then holding, quitted him on the instant . Immediately, he
files out some slender chains of brass, and nets, and meshes, which can
escape the eye. The finest threads cannot surpass that work, nor yet the
cobweb that hangs from the top of the beam. He makes it so, too, as to
yield to a slight touch, and a gentle movement, and skilfully arranges
it drawn around the bed. When the wife and the gallant come into the
same bed, being both caught through the artifice of the husband, and
chains prepared by this new contrivance, they are held fast in the very midst of their embraces. “The Lemnian God immediately threw open the folding doors 29 of ivory, and admitted the Deities. There 145 IV. 186-207 they lay 127 IV. 186-210 disgracefully bound. And yet many a one of the Gods, not the serious
ones, could fain wish thus to become disgraced. The Gods of heaven
laughed, and for a long time was this the most noted story in all
heaven. The Cytherean 30 goddess exacts satisfaction of the Sun, in
remembrance of this betrayal; and, in her turn, disturbs him with the
like passion, who had disturbed her secret amours. What now, son of
Hyperion, 31 does thy beauty, thy heat, and thy radiant light
avail thee? For thou, who dost burn all lands with thy flames, art now burnt with a new flame; and thou, who oughtst to be looking
at everything, art gazing on Leucothoë, and on one maiden art fixing
those eyes which thou oughtst to be fixing on the universe. At
one time thou art rising earlier in the Eastern sky; at another thou art
setting late in the waves; and in taking time to gaze on her ,
thou art lengthening the hours of mid-winter. Sometimes thou art
eclipsed, and the trouble of thy mind affects thy light, and, darkened,
thou fillest with terror the breasts of mortals. Nor art thou pale,
because the form of the moon, nearer to the earth, stands in thy way. It
is that passion which occasions this complexion. Thou lovest her alone,
neither does Clymene, nor Rhodos, 32 nor the most beauteous mother 33 of the Ææan Circe engage thee, nor yet Clytie, who, though despised, was
longing for thy embraces; at that very time thou wast suffering these
grievous 146 IV. 208-232 pangs. Leucothoë occasioned the forgetting of many a damsel; she, whom
Eurynome, the most beauteous of the 128 IV. 210-233 perfume-bearing 34 nation produced. 35 But after her daughter grew up, as
much as the mother excelled all other Nymphs , so much did the
daughter excel the mother. Her father, Orchamus, ruled over the
Achæmenian 36 cities, and he is reckoned the seventh in descent
from the ancient Belus. 37 “The pastures of the horses of the Sun are under the Western sky;
instead of grass, they have ambrosia. 38 That nourishes their limbs
wearied with their daily service, and refits them for labor. And while
the coursers are there eating their heavenly food, and night is taking
her turn; the God enters the beloved chamber, changed into the shape of
her mother Eurynome, and beholds Leucothoë among twice six handmaids,
near the threshold, drawing out the smooth threads with twirling
spindle. When, therefore, as though her mother, he has given kisses to
her dear daughter, he says, “There is a secret matter, which I have
to mention ; maids, withdraw, and take not from a mother the
privilege of speaking in private with her daughter .” They obey;
and the God being left in the chamber without any witness, he says, ‘I
am he, who measures out the long year, who beholds all things, and through whom the earth sees all things; the eye, in
fact , of the universe. Believe me, thou art pleasing to me .’ She is affrighted; and in her alarm, both her distaff
and her spindle fall from her relaxed fingers. Her very fear becomes
her; and he, no longer delaying, returns to his true shape, and his wonted
beauty. But the 147 IV. 233-237 maiden, although startled at the unexpected sight, overcome by the
beauty of the God, 39 and dismissing all complaints,
submits to his embrace. 129 IV. 234-244 EXPLANATION. Plutarch, in his Treatise ‘How to read the Poets,’ suggests a curious
explanation of the discovery by the Sun of the intrigue of Mars and
Venus. He says that such persons as are born under the conjunction of
the planets Mars and Venus, are naturally of an amorous temperament; but
that if the Sun does not happen then to be at a distance, their
indiscretions will be very soon discovered. Palæphatus gives a historical solution to the story. He says that
Helius, the son of Vulcan, king of Egypt, resolving to cause his
father’s laws against adultery to be strictly observed, and having been
informed that a lady of the court had an intrigue with one of the
courtiers, entered her apartment in the night, and obtaining ocular
proof of the courtier’s guilt, caused him to be severely punished. He
also tells us that the similarity of the name gave birth to the Fable
which Homer was the first to relate, with a small variation, and which
is here copied by Ovid. Libanius, deploring the burning of the Temple of
Apollo near Antioch, complains of the ingratitude of Vulcan to that God,
who had formerly discovered to him the infidelity of his wife;
a subject upon which St. Chrysostom seems to think that the
rhetorician would have done better to have been silent. FABLE III. Clytie , in a fit of revenge, discovers
the adventure of Leucothoë to her father, who orders her to be buried
alive. The Sun, grieved at her misfortune, changed her into the
frankincense tree; he also despises the informer, who pines away for
love of him, and is at last changed into the sunflower. Clytie envied her, (for the love of
the Sun 40 for her had not been moderate), and, urged on by
resentment at a rival, she published the intrigue, and, when spread
abroad, brought it to the notice of her father. He, fierce and
unrelenting, cruelly buried her alive deep in the ground, as she
entreated and stretched out her 148 IV. 238-267 hands towards the light of the Sun, and cried, “’Twas he that offered
violence to me against my will;” and upon her he placed a heap of heavy
sand. The son of Hyperion scattered it with his rays, and gave a passage
to thee, by which thou mightst be able to put forth thy buried
features. But thou, Nymph, couldst not now raise thy head smothered with the
weight of the earth; and there thou didst lie, a lifeless 130 IV. 244-270 body. The governor of the winged steeds is said to have beheld nothing
more afflicting than that, since the lightnings that caused the death of
Phaëton. He, indeed, endeavors, if he can, to recall her cold limbs to
an enlivening heat, by the strength of his rays. But, since fate opposes
attempts so great, he sprinkles both her body and the place with
odoriferous nectar, and having first uttered many a complaint he says,
“Still shalt thou reach the skies.” 41 Immediately, the body, steeped in
the heavenly nectar, dissolves, and moistens the earth with its
odoriferous juices; and a shoot of frankincense having taken root by
degrees through the clods, rises up and bursts the hillock with its
top. But the author of light came no more to Clytie (although love might
have excused her grief, and her grief the betrayal); and he put an end
to his intercourse with her. From that time she, who had made so mad a
use of her passion, pined away, loathing the other Nymphs; and in
the open air, night and day, she sat on the bare ground, with her hair
dishevelled and unadorned. And for nine days, without water or food, she
subsisted in her fast, merely on dew and her own tears; and she did not
raise herself from the ground. She only used to look towards the face of
the God as he moved along, and to turn her own features towards him.
They say that her limbs became rooted fast in the ground; and a livid
paleness turned part of her 149 IV. 268-277 color into that of a bloodless plant. There is a redness in some
part; and a flower, very like a violet, 42 conceals her face. Though she
is held fast by a root, she turns towards the Sun, and though changed, she still retains her passion. EXPLANATION. No ascertained historical fact can be found as the basis of the story of
Leucothoë being buried alive by her father Orchamus, or of her rival 131 IV. 271-284 Clytie being metamorphosed into a sunflower. The story seems to have
been most probably simply founded on principles of natural philosophy.
Leucothoë, it is not unreasonable to suppose, may have been styled the
daughter of Orchamus, king of Persia, for no other reason but because
that Prince was the first to introduce the frankincense tree, which was
called Leucothoë, into his kingdom; and it was added that she fell in
love with Apollo, because the tree produces an aromatic drug much used
in physic, of which that God was fabled to have been the inventor. The
jealousy of Clytie was, perhaps, founded upon a fact, stated by some
naturalists, that the sunflower is a plant which kills the frankincense
tree, when growing near it. Pliny, however, who ascribes several
properties to the sunflower, does not mention this among them. Orchamus is nowhere mentioned by the ancient writers, except in the
present instance. FABLE IV. Daphnis is turned into a stone. Scython
is changed from a man into a woman. Celmus is changed into adamant.
Crocus and Smilax are made into flowers. The Curetes are produced from a
shower. Thus she spoke; and the
wondrous deed charms their ears. Some deny that it was possible to be
done, some say that real Gods can do all things; but Bacchus is not one
of them. When her sisters have become silent, Alcithoë is called upon;
who running with her shuttle through the warp of the hanging web, says,
“I keep silence upon the well-known amours of Daphnis, the 150 IV. 277-284 shepherd of Ida, 43 whom the resentment of the Nymph, his paramour,
turned into a stone. Such mighty grief inflames those who are in love.
Nor do I relate how once Scython, the law of nature being altered, was
of both sexes first a man, then a woman. Thee too, I pass by,
O Celmus, now adamant, formerly most attached to Jupiter when little; and the Curetes, 44 sprung from a plenteous shower of
rain; Crocus, too, changed, together with Smilax, 45 into little flowers;
and I will entertain your minds with a pleasing novelty .” 132 IV. 284-295 EXPLANATION. Most probably, the story of the shepherd Daphnis being turned into a
stone, was no other than an allegorical method of expressing the
insensibility of an individual. Thalia was the name of the Nymph who was
thus affronted by Daphnis. The story of Scython changing his sex, is perhaps based upon the fact,
that the country of Thrace, which took the name of Thracia from a famous
sorceress, was before called Scython; and that as it lost a name of the
masculine gender for one of the feminine, in after times it became
reported that Scython had changed sexes. Pliny tells us that Celmus was a young man of remarkable wisdom and
moderation, and that the passions making no impression on him, he was
changed into adamant. Some, however, assert that he was foster-father to
Jupiter, by whom he was enclosed in an impenetrable tower, for revealing
the immortality of the Gods. According to one account, Crocus and Smilax were a constant and happy
married couple, who for their chaste and innocent life were said to have
been changed into flowers; but another story is, that Crocus was a youth
beloved by Smilax , and that on his rejecting the Nymph’s advances,
they were both turned into flowers. The story of the Curetes being sprung from rain, is possibly founded on
the report that they were descended from Uranus and Tita, the Heaven and
the Earth. Some suppose them to have been 151 IV. 285-310 the original inhabitants of the isle of Crete; and they are said to have
watched over the infancy of Jupiter, by whom they were afterwards slain,
for having concealed Epaphus from his wrath. FABLE V. The Naiad Salmacis falls in love with
the youth Hermaphroditus, who rejects her advances. While he is bathing,
she leaps into the water, and seizing the youth in her arms, they become
one body, retaining their different sexes. Learn how Salmacis became infamous, and why it enervates, with its enfeebling waters, and softens the
limbs bathed in it . The cause is unknown; but the
properties of the fountain are very well known. The Naiads nursed a boy,
born to Mercury of the Cytherean Goddess in the caves of Ida; whose face
was such that therein both mother and father could be discerned; he
likewise took his name from them. As soon as he had completed thrice
five years, he forsook his native mountains, and leaving Ida, the place
of his nursing, he loved to wander over 133 IV. 295-326 unknown spots, and to see unknown rivers, his curiosity lessening
the fatigue. He went, too, to the Lycian 46 cities, and the
Carians, that border upon Lycia. Here he sees a pool of water, clear to
the very ground at the bottom; here there are no fenny reeds, no
barren sedge, no rushes with their sharp points. The water is
translucent; but the edges of the pool are enclosed with green turf, and
with grass ever verdant. A Nymph dwells there ; but one
neither skilled in hunting, nor accustomed to bend the bow, nor to
contend in speed; the only one, too, of all the Naiads not known
to the swift Diana. The report is, that her sisters often said to her,
“Salmacis, do take either the javelin, or the painted quiver, and unite
thy leisure with the toils of the chase.” She takes neither the javelin,
nor the painted quiver, nor does she unite her leisure with the toils of
the chase. But sometimes she is bathing her beauteous limbs in her own
spring; 152 IV. 311-333 and often is she straitening her hair with a comb of Citorian
boxwood, 47 and consulting the waters, into which she looks, what
is befitting her. At other times, covering her body with a transparent
garment, she reposes either on the soft leaves or on the soft grass.
Ofttimes is she gathering flowers. And then, too, by chance was she
gathering them when she beheld the youth, and wished to possess him, thus seen. But though she hastened to approach the youth , still she did
not approach him before she had put herself in order, and before she had
surveyed her garments, and put on her best looks, and deserved to
be thought beautiful. Then thus did she begin to speak: “O youth,
most worthy to be thought to be a God! if thou art a God, thou mayst well be Cupid; but, if thou art a mortal, happy are they who
begot thee, and blessed is thy brother, and fortunate indeed thy sister,
if thou hast one, and the nurse as well who gave thee the breast.
But far, far more fortunate than all these is she ; if thou hast
any wife, if thou shouldst vouchsafe any one the honor of marriage. 134 IV. 326-349 And if any one is thy wife, then let my pleasure be stolen; but,
if thou hast none, let me be thy wife , and let us unite in one
tie.” After these things said , the Naiad is silent; a blush
tinges the face of the youth: he knows not what love is, but even to
blush becomes him. Such is the color of apples, hanging on a tree
exposed to the sun, or of painted ivory, or of the moon blushing beneath
her brightness when the aiding cymbals 48 of brass are
resounding in 153 IV. 334-349 vain. Upon the Nymph desiring, without ceasing, such kisses at least as
he might give to his sister, and now laying her hands upon his neck,
white as ivory, he says, “Wilt thou desist, or am I to fly, and to leave
this place, together with thee?” Salmacis is affrighted, and says, “I freely give up this spot to
thee, stranger,” and, with a retiring step, she pretends to go away. But
then looking back, and hid in a covert of shrubs, she lies concealed,
and puts her bended knees down to the ground. But he, just like a boy,
and as though unobserved on the retired sward, goes here and there, and
in the sportive waves dips the soles of his feet, and then his
feet as far as his ankles. Nor is there any delay; being charmed with
the temperature of the pleasant waters, he throws off his soft garments
from his tender body. Then, indeed, Salmacis is astonished, and burns
with desire for his naked beauty. The eyes, too, of the Nymph are on
fire, no otherwise than as when the Sun, 49 most brilliant 154 IV. 349-375 with his clear orb, is reflected 135 IV. 349-371 from the opposite image of a mirror. With difficulty does she endure
delay; hardly does she now defer her joy. Now she longs to embrace him;
and now, distracted, she can hardly contain herself. He, clapping his
body with his hollow palms, swiftly leaps into the stream, and throwing
out his arms alternately, shines in the limpid water, as if any one were
to cover statues of ivory, or white lilies, with clear glass. “I have gained my point,” says the Naiad; “see, he is mine!” and, all
her garments thrown aside, she plunges in the midst of the waters, and
seizes him resisting her, and snatches reluctant kisses, and thrusts
down her hands, and touches his breast against his will, and clings
about the youth, now one way, and now another. Finally, as he is
struggling against her, and desiring to escape, she entwines herself
about him, like a serpent which the royal bird takes up and is bearing
aloft; and as it hangs, it holds fast his head and feet, and enfolds his
spreading wings with its tail. Or, as the ivy is wont to wind itself
along the tall trunks of trees ; and as the polypus 50 holds
fast its enemy, caught beneath the waves, by letting down his suckers on
all sides; so does the descendant of Atlas 51 still persist,
and deny the Nymph the hoped-for joy. She presses him hard; and clinging
to him with every limb, as she holds fast, she says, “Struggle as thou
mayst, perverse one, still thou shalt not escape. So ordain it, ye Gods,
and let no time 136 IV. 371-390 separate him from me, nor me from him.” Her prayers find propitious
Deities, for the mingled bodies of the two are united, 52 and one human
shape is put upon them; just as if any one should see 155 IV. 376-391 branches beneath a common bark join in growing, and spring up together.
So, when their bodies meet together in the firm embrace, they are no
more two, and their form is twofold, so that they can neither be styled
woman nor boy; they seem to be neither and both. Therefore, when Hermaphroditus sees that the limpid waters, into
which he had descended as a man, have made him but half a male, and that
his limbs are softened in them, holding up his hands, he says, but now
no longer with the voice of a male, “O, both father and mother,
grant this favor to your son, who has the name of you both, that whoever
enters these streams a man, may go out thence but half a man, and
that he may suddenly become effeminate in the waters when touched.” Both
parents, moved, give their assent to the words of their two-shaped son,
and taint the fountain with drugs of ambiguous quality. EXPLANATION. The only probable solution of this story seems to have been the fact
that there was in Caria, near the town of Halicarnassus, as we read in
Vitruvius, a fountain which was instrumental in civilizing certain
barbarians who had been driven from that neighborhood by the Argive
colony established there. These men being obliged to repair to the
fountain for water, and meeting the Greek colonists there, their
intercourse not only polished them, but in course of time corrupted
them, by the introduction of the luxurious manners of Greece. Hence the
fountain had the reputation of changing men into women. Possibly the water of that fountain, by some peculiar chemical quality,
made those who drank of it become soft and effeminate, as waters are to
be occasionally found with extraordinary qualities. Lylius Gyraldus
suggests, that several disgraceful adventures happened near this
fountain (which was enclosed by walls), which in time gave it a bad
name. FABLE VI. Bacchus , to punish the daughters of
Minyas for their contempt of his worship, changes them into bats, and
their work into ivy and vine leaves. There was now an end of their
stories; and still do the daughters 137 IV. 390-417 of Minyas go on with their work, and despise the God, and desecrate his
festival; when, on a sudden, tambourines unseen resound with their
jarring 156 IV. 392-417 noise; the pipe, too, with the crooked horn, and the tinkling brass,
re-echo; myrrh and saffron shed their fragrant odors; and, a thing
past all belief, their webs begin to grow green, and the cloth hanging in the loom to put forth foliage like ivy. Part changes into
vines, and what were threads before, are now turned into vine
shoots. Vine branches spring from the warp, and the purple lends its
splendor to the tinted grapes. And now the day was past, and the time came on, which you could
neither call darkness nor light, but yet the very commencement of
the dubious night along with the light. The house seemed suddenly to
shake, and unctuous torches to burn, and the building to shine with
glowing fires, and the fictitious phantoms of savage wild beasts to
howl. Presently, the sisters are hiding themselves throughout the
smoking house, and in different places are avoiding the fires and the
light. While they are seeking a hiding-place, a membrane is
stretched over their small limbs, and covers their arms with light
wings; nor does the darkness suffer them to know by what means they have
lost their former shape. No feathers bear them up; yet they support
themselves on pellucid wings; and, endeavoring to speak, they utter a
voice very diminutive even in proportion to their bodies, and
express their low complaints with a squeaking sound. They frequent
houses, not woods; and, abhorring the light, they fly abroad by
night. And from the late evening do they derive their name. 53 FABLE VII. Tisiphone , being sent by Juno to the
Palace of Athamas, causes him to become mad; on which he dashes his son
Learchus to pieces against a wall. He then pursues his wife Ino, who
throws herself headlong from the top of a rock into the sea, with her
other son Melicerta in her arms: when Neptune, at the intercession of
Venus, changes them into Sea Deities. The attendants of Ino, who have
followed her in her flight, are changed, some into stone, and others
into birds, as they are about to throw themselves into the sea after
their mistress. But then the Divine power of Bacchus
is famed 157 IV. 417-441 throughout all 138 IV. 417-444 Thebes; and his aunt is everywhere telling of the great might of the new
Divinity; she alone, 54 out of so many sisters, is free from sorrow,
except that which her sisters have occasioned. Juno beholds her, having
her soul elevated with her children , and her alliance with
Athamas, and the God her foster-child. She cannot brook this, and says
to herself, “Was the child of a concubine able to transform the Mæonian
sailors, and to overwhelm them in the sea, and to give the entrails of
the son to be torn to pieces by his mother, and to cover the three
daughters of Minyas with newly formed wings? Shall Juno be able to do nothing but
lament these griefs unrevenged? And is that sufficient for me? Is this
my only power? He himself instructs me what to do. It is right to be
taught even by an enemy. And what madness can do , A he shows enough, and more
than enough, by the slaughter of Pentheus. Why should not Ino, too , be goaded by madness, and submit to an example kindred to
those of her sisters?” There is a shelving path, shaded with dismal yew, which leads through
profound silence to the infernal abodes. Here languid Styx
exhales vapors; and the new-made ghosts descend this way, and phantoms
when they have enjoyed 55 funeral rites. Horror and winter possess these
dreary regions far and wide, and the ghosts newly arrived know not where
the way is that leads to the Stygian city, or where is the dismal
palace of the black Pluto. The wide city has a thousand passages, and
gates open on every side. And as the sea receives the rivers for
the whole earth, so does that spot 56 receive 158 IV. 442-459 all the souls; nor is it too little for any amount of people, 139 IV. 444-461 nor does it perceive the crowd to increase. The shades wander about,
bloodless, without body and bones; and some throng the place of
judgment; some the abode of the infernal prince. Some pursue various
callings, in imitation of their former life; their own punishment
confines others. Juno, the daughter of Saturn, leaving her celestial habitation,
submits to go thither, so much does she give way to hatred and to anger.
Soon as she has entered there, and the threshold groans, pressed by her
sacred body, Cerberus raises his threefold mouth, and utters triple
barkings at the same moment. She summons the Sisters, 57 begotten of
Night, terrible and implacable Goddesses. They are sitting before the
doors of the prison shut close with adamant, and are combing black
vipers from their hair. Soon as they recognize her amid the shades of
darkness, these Deities arise. This place is called “the
accursed.” Tityus 58 is giving his entrails to be mangled, and is
stretched over nine acres. By thee, Tantalus, 59 no waters are
reached, and the tree which overhangs thee, starts away. Sisyphus, 60 thou 159 IV. 460-481 art either catching or thou art pushing on the stone destined to fall
again. Ixion 61 is whirled 140 IV. 461-496 round, and both follows and flies from himself. The granddaughters, too,
of Belus, who dared to plot the destruction of their cousins, are
everlastingly taking up the water which they lose. After the daughter of
Saturn has beheld all these with a stern look, and Ixion before all;
again, after him, looking upon Sisyphus, she says, “Why does he alone, of all the brothers, suffer eternal
punishment? and why does a rich palace contain the proud Athamas, who,
with his wife, has ever despised me?” And then she explains the
cause of her hatred and of her coming, and what it is she desires. What
she desires is, that the palace of Cadmus shall not stand, and that the
Sister Furies shall involve Athamas in crime. She mingles
together promises, commands, and entreaties, and solicits the Goddesses.
When Juno has thus spoken, Tisiphone, with her locks dishevelled as they
are, shakes them, and throws back from her face the snakes crawling over
it; and thus she says: “There is no need of a long preamble; whatever
thou commandest, consider it as done: leave these hateful realms, and
betake thyself to the air of a better heaven.” Juno returns, overjoyed; and, preparing to enter heaven, Iris, 62 the daughter of Thaumas, purifies her by sprinkling water. Nor is there
any delay; the persecuting Tisiphone 63 takes a torch reeking with gore,
and puts on a cloak red with fluid blood, and is girt 160 IV. 482-511 with twisted snakes, and then goes forth from her abode. Mourning
attends her as she goes, and Fright, and Terror, and Madness with
quivering features. She now reaches the threshold; the Æolian
door-posts are said to have shaken, and paleness tints the maple door;
the Sun, too, flies from the place. His wife is terrified at these
prodigies; Athamas, too , is alarmed, and they are both preparing to leave the house. The baneful Erinnys stands in the way, and
blocks up the passage; and extending her arms twisted round with folds
of vipers, she shakes her locks; the snakes thus moved, emit a
sound. Some lying about her shoulders, some gliding around her temples,
send forth hissings and 141 IV. 496-523 vomit forth corruption, and dart forth their tongues. Then she tears
away two snakes from the middle of her hair, which, with pestilential
hand, she throws against them. But these creep along the breasts of Ino
and Athamas, and inspire them with direful intent. Nor do they inflict
any wounds upon their limbs; it is the mind that feels the direful
stroke. She had brought, too, with her a monstrous composition of liquid
poison, the foam of the mouth of Cerberus, and the venom of Echidna; 64 and purposeless aberrations, and the forgetfulness of a darkened
understanding, and crime, and tears, and rage, and the love of murder.
All these were blended together; and, mingled with fresh blood she had
boiled them in a hollow vessel of brass, stirred about with a stalk
of green hemlock. And while they are trembling, she throws the
maddening poison into the breasts of them both, and moves their inmost
vitals. Then repeatedly waving her torch in the same circle, she swiftly
follows up the flames thus excited with fresh flames. Thus
triumphant, and having executed her commands, she returns to the empty
realms of the great Pluto; and she ungirds the snakes which she had put
on. 161 IV. 512-533 Immediately the son of Æolus, filled with rage, cries out, in the midst
of his palace, “Ho! companions, spread your nets in this wood; for here
a lioness was just now beheld by me with two young ones.” And, in his
madness, he follows the footsteps of his wife, as though of a wild
beast; and he snatches Learchus, smiling and stretching forth his little
arms from the bosom of his mother, and three or four times he whirls him
round in the air like a sling, and, frenzied, he dashes in pieces 65 the bones of the infant against the hard stones. Then, at last, the
mother being roused (whether it was grief that caused it, or whether the
power of the poison spread over her ), yells aloud, and runs away
distracted, with dishevelled hair; and carrying thee, Melicerta,
a little child , in 142 IV. 523-542 her bare arms, she cries aloud “Evoë, Bacche.” At the name of Bacchus,
Juno smiles, and says, “May thy foster-child 66 do thee this
service.” There is a rock 67 that hangs over the sea; the lowest part is worn
hollow by the waves, and defends the waters covered thereby from
the rain. The summit is rugged, and stretches out its brow over the open
sea. This Ino climbs (madness gives her strength), and, restrained by no
fear, she casts herself and her burden 68 into the deep; the water,
struck by her fall , is white with foam. But Venus, pitying the
misfortunes of her guiltless granddaughter, 69 in soothing words
thus addresses her uncle: “O Neptune, thou God of the waters, 162 IV. 534-556 to whom fell a power next after the empire of heaven, great
things indeed do I request; but do thou take compassion on my kindred,
whom thou seest being tossed upon the boundless Ionian sea; 70 and add
them to thy Deities. I have surely some interest with the
sea, if, indeed, I once was foam formed in the hollowed B deep, and my
Grecian name is derived 71 from that.” Neptune yields to her request; and
takes away from them all that is mortal, and gives them a
venerable majesty; and alters both their name and their shape, and 143 IV. 542-562 calls Palæmon a Divinity, 72 together with his mother
Leucothoë. Her Sidonian attendants, 73 so far as they could, tracing the
prints of their feet, saw the last of them on the edge of the rock; and
thinking that there was no doubt of their death, they lamented the house
of Cadmus, with their hands tearing their hair and their garments; and
they threw the odium on the Goddess, as being unjust and too severe
against the concubine. Juno could not endure their reproaches, and said,
“I will make you yourselves tremendous memorials of my
displeasure.” Confirmation followed her words. For the one who had been
especially attached, said, “I will follow the queen into the sea;”
and about to give the leap, she could not be moved any way, and adhering
to the rock, there she stuck fast. Another, while she was
attempting to beat her breast with the accustomed blows, perceived in
the attempt that her arms had become stiff. One, as by chance she had
extended her 163 IV. 556-562 hands over the waters of the sea, becoming a rock, held out her hands in
those same waters. You might see the fingers of another suddenly
hardened in her hair, as she was tearing her locks seized on the top of
her head. In whatever posture each was found at the beginning of the
change , in the same she remained. Some became birds; which, sprung
from Ismenus, skim along the surface of the waves in those seas, with
the wings which they have assumed. EXPLANATION. The story of Ino, Athamas, and Melicerta appears to have been based upon
historical facts, as we are informed by Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and
Pausanias. Athamas, the son of Æolus, and great-grandson of Deucalion, having, on
the death of Themisto, his first wife, married Ino, the daughter of
Cadmus, divorced her soon afterwards, to marry Nephele, by whom he had
Helle and Phryxus . She having been divorced in her turn, he took
Ino back again, and by her had Learchus and Melicerta . Ino, not being able to
endure the presence of the children of Nephele, endeavored to destroy
them. The city of Thebes being at that time afflicted with famine, 144 IV. 563-571 which was said to have been caused by Ino, who ordered the seed to be
parched before it was sown, Athamas ordered the oracle of Delphi to be
consulted. The priests, either having been bribed, or the messengers
having been corrupted, word was brought, that, to remove this
affliction, the children of Nephele must be sacrificed. Phryxus being warned of the designs of his stepmother, embarked in a
ship, with his sister Helle, and sailed for Colchis, where he met with a
kind reception from his kinsman Æetes. The young princess, however,
either becoming sea-sick, and leaning over the bulwarks of the vessel,
fell overboard and was drowned, or died a natural death in the passage
of the Hellespont, to which she gave its name from that circumstance.
Athamas, having discovered the deceitful conduct of Ino, in his rage
killed her son Learchus, and sought her, for the purpose of sacrificing
her to his vengeance. To avoid his fury, she fled with her son
Melicerta, and, being pursued, threw herself from a rock into the sea.
To console her relatives, the story was probably invented, that the Gods
had changed Ino and Melicerta into Sea Deities, under the names of
Leucothoë and Palæmon. Melicerta was afterwards worshipped in the Isle
of Tenedos, where children were offered to him in sacrifice. In his
honor, Glaucus established the Isthmian games, which were celebrated for
many ages at Corinth; and, being interrupted for a time, were revived by
Theseus, in honor of Neptune. Leucothoë was also worshipped at Rome, and
the Roman women used to offer up their vows to her for their brothers’
children, not daring to supplicate the Goddess for their own, because
she had been unfortunate in hers. This Ovid tells us in the Sixth Book
of the Fasti. The Romans gave the name of Matuta to Ino, and Melicerta,
or Palæmon, was called Portunus. 164 IV. 565-587 The circumstance mentioned by Ovid, that some of Ino’s attendants were
changed into birds, and others into rocks, is, perhaps, only a poetical
method of saying that some of her attendants escaped, while others
perished with her. FABLE VIII. The misfortunes of his family oblige
Cadmus to leave Thebes, and to retire with his wife Hermione to Illyria,
where they are changed into serpents. The son of Agenor knows not that his
daughter and his little grandson are now Deities of the sea.
Forced by sorrow, and a succession of calamities, and the prodigies
which, many in number, he had beheld, the founder flies from his city,
as though the ill -luck of the spot, and not his own, pressed hard upon him, and driven, in a long series of wandering, he
reaches the coast of Illyria, with his exiled wife. And now, loaded with
woes and with years, while they are reflecting on the first disasters of
their house, and in their discourse are recounting their misfortunes,
Cadmus says, “Was that dragon a sacred one, that was pierced 145 IV. 572-603 by my spear, at the time when, setting out from Sidon, I sowed the
teeth of the dragon in the ground, a seed till then unknown?
If the care of the Gods avenges this with resentment so unerring,
I pray that I myself, as a serpent, may be lengthened out into an
extended belly.” Thus he says; and, as a serpent, he is
lengthened out into an extended belly, and perceives scales growing on
his hardened skin, and his black body become speckled with azure spots;
and he falls flat on his breast, and his legs, joined into one, taper
out by degrees into a thin round point. His arms are still remaining;
those arms which remain he stretches out; and, as the tears are flowing
down his face, still that of a man, he says, “Come hither, wife, come
hither, most unhappy one, and, while something of me yet remains, touch
me; and take my hand, while it is still a hand, and while
I am not a serpent all over.” He, indeed, desires to say more, but, on a
sudden, his tongue is divided into two parts. Nor are words in his power
when he offers to 165 IV. 588-603 speak ; and as often as he attempts to utter any complaints, he
makes a hissing: this is the voice that Nature leaves him. His wife,
smiting her naked breast with her hand, cries aloud, “Stay, Cadmus! and
deliver thyself, unhappy one, from this monstrous form. Cadmus, what
means this? Where are thy feet? where are both thy shoulders and thy
hands? where is thy color and thy form, and, while I speak, where all else besides ? Why do ye not, celestial Gods, turn me as well
into a similar serpent?” Thus she spoke; he licked the face of
his wife, and crept into her dear bosom, as though he recognized her;
and gave her embraces, and reached her well-known neck. Whoever is by, (some attendants are present), is alarmed; but the
crested snakes soothe them with their slippery necks, and suddenly they
are two serpents , and in joined folds they creep along, until
they enter the covert of an adjacent grove. Now, too, do they neither
shun mankind, nor hurt them with wounds, and the gentle serpents keep in
mind what once they were. EXPLANATION. After Cadmus had reigned at Thebes many years, a conspiracy was
formed against him. Being driven from the throne, and his grandson
Pentheus assuming the crown, he and his wife Hermione retired into
Illyria, where, as Apollodorus says, he commanded the Illyrian army, and
at length was chosen king: on his death, the story here related by Ovid
was 146 IV. 604-608 invented. It is possible that it may have been based on the following
grounds:— The Phœnicians were anciently called ‘Achivi,’ which name they still
retained after their establishment in Greece. ‘Chiva’ being also the
Hebrew, and perhaps Phœnician word for ‘a serpent,’ the Greeks, probably
in reference to the Phœnician origin of Cadmus, reported after his
death, that he and his wife were serpents; and in time, that
transformation may have been stated to have happened at the end of his
life. According to Aulus Gellius, the ancient inhabitants of Illyria had
two eyelids to each eye, and with their looks, when angered, they were
able to kill those whom they beheld stedfastly . The Greeks hence called them
serpents and basilisks; and, it is not unlikely, that when Cadmus
retired among them, they said that he had become one of the Illyrians,
otherwise a dragon, or a serpent. All the ancient writers who mention
his history agree that Cadmus really did retire into Illyria, where he
first assisted the Enchelians in their war against the Illyrians. The
latter were defeated, and, to obtain a peace from the Enchelians, they
gave the crown to Cadmus; to which, on his death, his son Illyrus
succeeded. The historian Christodorus, quoted by Pausanias, 166 IV. 604-617 says that he built the city of Nygnis, in the country of the
Enchelians. Some writers have supposed, upon the authority of Euhemerus as quoted by
Eusebius that Cadmus was not the son of Agenor, but was one of his
officers, who eloped thence with Hermione, a singing girl. Others
suppose that Cadmus is not really a proper name, but that it signifies a
‘leader,’ or ‘conductor;’ and that he received the name from leading a
colony into Greece. Bochart says that he was
called Cadmus, because he came from the eastern part of Phœnicia, which
is called in Scripture ‘Cadmonia,’ or ‘oriental;’ and that Hermione
probably received her name from Mount Hermon. FABLE IX. Perseus , the son of Jupiter and Danaë,
having killed Medusa, carries her head into Africa, where the blood that
runs from it produces serpents. Atlas, king of that country, terrified
at the remembrance of an oracle, which had foretold that his golden
fruit should be taken by one of the sons of Jupiter, not only orders him
to depart, but even resorts to violence to drive him away, on which
Perseus shows him the Gorgon’s head, and changes him into a
mountain. But yet their grandson, Bacchus gave them both a great consolation, under this change of
form; whom India, subdued by him , worshipped as a God, and whom Achaia honored with erected temples. Acrisius the son of
Abas, 74 descended 147 IV. 608-644 of the same race, 75 alone remained, to drive him from the walls of the
Argive city, and to bear arms against the God, and to believe him not to
be the offspring of Jove. Neither did he think Perseus to be the
offspring of Jupiter, whom Danaë had conceived in a shower of gold; but
soon (so great is the power of truth) Acrisius was sorry, both that he
had insulted the God, and that he had not acknowledged his grandson. The
one was now placed in heaven, while the other, bearing the memorable
spoil of the viperous monster, cut the yielding air with hissing wings;
and while the conqueror was hovering over the 167 IV. 617-652 Libyan sands, bloody drops, from the Gorgon’s head, fell down, upon
receiving which, the ground quickened them into various serpents.
For this cause, that region is filled and infested with snakes. Carried thence, by the fitful winds, through boundless space, he is
borne now here, now there, just like a watery cloud, and, from the lofty
sky, looks down upon the earth, removed afar; and he flies over the
whole world. Three times he saw the cold Bears, thrice did he see the
claws of the Crab; ofttimes he was borne to the West, many a time to the
East. And now, the day declining, afraid to trust himself to the night,
he stopped in the Western part of the world, in the kingdom of Atlas;
and there he sought a little rest, until Lucifer should usher
forth the fires of Aurora, Aurora, the chariot of the day. Here was
Atlas, the son of Iapetus, surpassing all men in the vastness of his
body. Under this king was the extremity of the earth, and the sea which
holds its waters under the panting horses of the Sun, and receives the
wearied chariot. For him, a thousand flocks, and as many herds,
wandered over the pastures, and no neighboring places disturbed the
land. Leaves of the trees, shining with radiant gold, covered branches
of gold, and apples of gold. “My friend,” said Perseus to him,
“if the glory of a noble race influences thee, Jupiter is the author of
my descent; or if thou art an admirer of exploits, thou wilt admire
mine. I beg of thee hospitality, and a resting place.” The other
was mindful of an ancient oracle. The Parnassian Themis had given this
response: “A time will come, 148 IV. 644-662 Atlas, when thy tree shall be stripped of its gold, and a son of Jove
shall have the honor of the prize.” Dreading this, Atlas had enclosed
his orchard with solid walls, and had given it to be kept by a huge
dragon; 76 and expelled all strangers from his territories. To Perseus , too, he says, “Far hence begone, lest the glory of
the exploits, to which thou falsely pretendest, and Jupiter as well, be
far from protecting thee.” He adds violence as well to his threats, and
tries to drive him from his doors, as he hesitates and mingles resolute
words with 168 IV. 653-662 persuasive ones. Inferior in strength (for who could be a match for
Atlas in strength?), he says “Since my friendship is of so little value
to thee, accept this present;” and then, turning his face away,
he exposes on the left side the horrible features of Medusa. Atlas,
great as he is, becomes a mountain. Now his beard and his hair are
changed into woods; his shoulders and his hands become mountain ridges,
and what was formerly his head, is the summit on the top of the
mountain. His bones become stones; then, enlarged on every side, he
grows to an immense height (so you willed it, ye Gods), and the whole
heaven, with so many stars, rests upon him. EXPLANATION. The story of the seduction of Danaë, the mother of Perseus, by Jupiter,
in the form of a shower of gold, has been thus explained by some of the
ancient writers. Acrisius, hearing of a prediction that Danaë, his
daughter, should bring forth a child that would kill him, caused her to
be shut in a tower with brazen gates, or, according to some, in a
subterraneous chamber, covered with plates of that metal; which place,
according to Pausanias, remained till the time of Perilaus, the king of
Argos, by whom it was destroyed. The precautions of Acrisius were,
however, made unavailing by his brother Prœtus; who, falling in love
with his niece, corrupted the guards with gold, and gained admission
into the tower. Danaë, being delivered of Perseus, her father caused
them to be exposed in a boat to the mercy of the waves. Being cast on
shore near Seriphus, the king, Polydectes, gave them a hospitable
reception, and took care of the education of Perseus. Diodorus Siculus says that the Gorgons were female warriors, who
inhabited the neighborhood of Lake Tritonis, in Libya. Pausanias
explains the story of Medusa, by saying that she ruled the people in
that neighborhood, and laid waste the lands of the nations in her
vicinity. Perseus, having fled, with some companions, from Peloponnesus,
surprised her by night, and killed her, together with her escort. The
next morning, the beauty of her face appeared so remarkable that he cut
it off, and afterwards 149 took it with him to Greece, to show it to the people, who could not look
on it without being struck with astonishment. On this explanation we may
remark, that if it is true, Perseus must have had more skill than the
surgeons of our day, in being able to preserve the beauty of the
features so long after death. Again, many of the ancient historians, with Pliny, Athenæus, and
Solinus, think that the Gorgons were wild women of a savage nature,
living in caves and forests, who, falling on wayfarers, committed
dreadful atrocities. Palæphatus and Fulgentius think that the Gorgons
really were three young women, possessed of great wealth, which they
employed in a very careful manner; Phorcus, 169 their father, having left them three islands, and a golden statue of
Minerva, which they placed in their common treasury. They had one
minister in common for the management of their affairs, who used to go
for that purpose from one island to another, whence arose the story that
they had but one eye, and that they lent it to one another alternately.
Perseus, a fugitive from Argos, hearing of the golden statue,
determined to obtain it; and with that view, seized their minister, or,
in the allegorical language of the poets, took their eye away from them.
He then sent them word, that if they would give him the statue, he would
deliver up his captive, and threatened, in case of refusal, to put him
to death. Stheno and Euryale consented to this; but Medusa resisting,
she was killed by Perseus. Upon his obtaining the statue, which was
called the Gorgon, or Gorgonian, he broke it in pieces, and placed the
head on the prow of his ship. As the sight of this, and the fame of the
exploits of Perseus, spread terror everywhere, and caused passive
submission to him, the fable originated, that with Medusa’s head he
turned his enemies into stone. Landing in the Isle of Seriphus, the king
fled, with all his subjects; and, on entering the chief city, finding
nothing but the bare stones there, he caused the report to be spread,
that he had petrified the inhabitants. Servius, in his Commentary on the Æneid, quotes an opinion of Ammonius
Serenus, that the Gorgons were young women of such beauty as to make a
great impression on all that saw them; for which reason they were said
to turn them into statues. Le Clerc thinks that the story bears
reference to a voyage which the Phœnicians had made in ancient times to
the coast of Africa, whence they brought a great number of horses; and
that the name ‘Perseus’ comes from the Phœnician word ‘pharscha,’ ‘a
horseman;’ while the horse Pegasus was so called from the Phœnician
‘pagsous,’ ‘a bridled horse,’ according to the conjecture of Bochart.
Alexander of Myndus, a historian quoted by Athenæus, says that
Libya had an animal which the natives called ‘gorgon;’ that it resembled
a sheep, and with its breath killed all those who approached it; that a
tuft of hair fell over its eyes, which was so heavy as to be removed
with difficulty, for the purpose of seeing the objects around it; but
that when it was removed, by its looks it struck dead any person whom it
gazed upon. He says, that in the war with Jugurtha, some of the soldiers
of Marius were thus slain by it, and that it was at last killed by means
of arrows discharged from a great distance. The Gorgons are said to have inhabited the Gorgades, islands in the 150 IV. 663-670 Æthiopian Sea, the chief of which was called Cerna, according to
Diodorus and Palæphatus. It is not improbable that the Cape Verde
Islands were called by this name. The fable of the transformation of
Atlas into the mountain of that name may possibly have been based upon
the simple fact, that Perseus killed him in the neighborhood of that
range, from which circumstance it derived the name which it has borne
ever since. The golden apples, which Atlas guarded with so much care,
were probably either gold mines, which Atlas had discovered in the
mountains of his country, and had secured with armed men and watchful
dogs; or sheep, whose fleeces were extremely valuable for their
fineness; or else oranges and lemons, and other fruits peculiar to very
hot climates, 170 IV. 663-673 for the production of which the poets especially remarked the country of
Tingitana (the modern Tangier), as being very celebrated. FABLE X. Perseus , after his victory over Atlas,
and his change into a mountain, arrives in Æthiopia, at the time when
Andromeda is exposed to be devoured by a monster. He kills it, and hides
the Gorgon’s head under the sand, covered with sea-weed and plants;
which are immediately turned into coral. He then renders thanks to the
Gods for his victory, and marries Andromeda. At the marriage feast he
relates the manner in which he had killed Medusa; and the reason why
Minerva had changed her hair into serpents. The grandson of Hippotas 77 had shut
up the winds in their eternal prison; and Lucifer, who reminds men of their work, was risen in the lofty sky, in all his
splendor. Resuming his wings, Perseus binds his feet with them on
either side, and is girt with his crooked weapon, and cleaves the liquid
air with his winged ankles. Nations innumerable being left behind,
around and below, he beholds the people of the Æthiopians and the lands
of Cepheus. There the unjust Ammon 78 had ordered the innocent Andromeda
to suffer punishment for her mother’s tongue. 79 151 IV. 671-700 Soon as the descendant of Abas beheld
her, with her arms bound to the hard rock, but that the light breeze was
moving her hair, and her eyes were running 171 IV. 674-700 with warm 80 tears, he would have thought her to be a work of
marble. Unconsciously he takes fire, and is astonished; captivated with
the appearance of her beauty, thus beheld, he almost forgets to
wave his wings in the air. When he has lighted on the ground , he says,
“O thou, undeserving of these chains, but rather of those by
which anxious lovers are mutually united, disclose to me, inquiring both
the name of this land and of thyself, and why thou wearest these chains.” At first she is silent, and, a virgin, she does not dare
address 81 a man; and with her hands she would have concealed
her blushing features, if she had not been bound; her eyes, ’twas all she could do, she filled with gushing tears. Upon his often
urging her, lest she should seem unwilling to confess her offence, she
told the name both of her country and herself , and how
great had been the confidence of her mother in her beauty. All not yet
being told, the waves roared, and a monster approaching, 82 appeared with
its head raised out of the boundless ocean, and covered the wide expanse
with its breast. The virgin shrieks aloud; her mournful father, and her
distracted mother, are there, both wretched, but the latter more justly
so. Nor do they bring her any help with them, but tears suitable to the
occasion, and lamentations, and they cling round her body, bound to
the rock . Then thus the stranger says: “Plenty of time will be left for your
tears hereafter , the season for giving aid is but short.
If I were to demand her in marriage , I, Perseus, the son of
Jove, and of her whom, in prison, Jove embraced in the impregnating shower of gold, Perseus, the conqueror of the Gorgon with her
serpent 172 IV. 700-726 locks, and who has dared, on waving 152 IV. 700-729 wings, to move through the ætherial air, I should surely be
preferred before all as your son-in-law. To so many recommendations I
endeavor to add merit (if only the Deities favor me). I only stipulate that she may be mine, if preserved by my valor .” Her parents embrace the condition, (for who could hesitate?) and they
entreat his aid , and promise as well, the kingdom as a dowry.
Behold! as a ship onward speeding, with the beak fixed in its
prow , plows the waters, impelled by the perspiring arms 83 of
youths; so the monster, moving the waves by the impulse of its breast,
was as far distant from the rocks, as that distance in the mid
space of air, which a Balearic string can pass with the whirled plummet
of lead; when suddenly the youth, spurning the earth with his feet, rose
on high into the clouds. As the shadow of the hero was seen on the
surface of the sea, the monster vented its fury on the shadow so beheld. And as the bird of Jupiter, 84 when he has espied on the silent plain a serpent exposing its livid back to the
sun, seizes it behind; and lest it should turn upon him its raging
mouth, fixes his greedy talons in its scaly neck; so did the winged hero , in his rapid flight through the yielding air , press
the back of the monster, and the descendant of Inachus thrust his sword
up to the very hilt in its right shoulder, as it roared aloud. Tortured by the grievous wound, it sometimes raises itself aloft in
the air, sometimes it plunges beneath the waves, sometimes it wheels
about, just like a savage boar, which a pack of hounds in full cry
around him affrights. With swift wings he avoids the eager bites 85 of
the monster , and, with his crooked sword, one while wounds its back
covered with hollow shells, where it is exposed, at another time the
ribs of its sides, and now, 173 IV. 726-756 where its tapering tail terminates in that of a fish. The monster
vomits forth from its mouth streams mingled with red blood; its wings, made heavy by it , are wet with the 153 IV. 729-762 spray. Perseus, not daring any longer to trust himself on his dripping
pinions, 86 beholds a rock, which with its highest top projects
from the waters when becalmed, but is now covered by the
troubled sea. Resting on that, and clinging to the upper ridge 87 of the
rock with his left hand, three or four times he thrusts his sword
through its entrails aimed at by him . A shout, with
applause, fills the shores and the lofty abodes of the Gods. Cassiope
and Cepheus, the father, rejoice, and salute him as their son-in-law,
and confess that he is the support and the preserver of their house. Released from her chains, the virgin walks along, both the reward and
the cause of his labors. He himself washes his victorious hands in water
taken from the sea ; and that it may not injure the snake-bearing
head with the bare sand, he softens the ground with leaves; and strews
some weeds produced beneath the sea, and lays upon them the face of
Medusa, the daughter of Phorcys. The fresh weeds, being still alive,
imbibed the poison of the monster in their spongy pith, and hardened by
its touch; and felt an unwonted stiffness in their branches and their
leaves. But the Nymphs of the sea attempt the wondrous feat on many other weeds, and are pleased at the same result; and raise seed
again from them scattered on the waves. Even now the same nature remains
in the coral, that it receives hardness from contact with the air; and
what was a plant in the sea, out of the sea becomes stone. To three Deities he erects as many altars of turf; the left one to
Mercury; the right to thee, warlike Virgin; the altar of Jove is in the
middle. A cow is sacrificed to Minerva; a calf to the
wing-footed God, and a bull to thee, greatest of the Deities.
Forthwith he takes 174 IV. 757-783 Andromeda, and the reward of an achievement so great, without any dowry.
Hymenæus and Cupid wave their torches before them; the fires are heaped
with abundant perfumes. Garlands, too, are hanging from the houses:
flageolets and lyres, and pipes, and songs resound, the happy tokens of
a joyous mind. The folding-doors thrown open, 154 IV. 762-787 the entire gilded halls are displayed, and the nobles of king Cepheus
sit down at a feast furnished with splendid preparations. After they
have done the feast, and have cheered their minds with the gifts of the
generous Bacchus, the grandson of Abas inquires the customs and habits
of the country. Immediately one of them , Lyncides, tells him, on
his inquiring, the manners and habits of the inhabitants. Soon as he had
told him these things, he said, “Now, most valiant Perseus, tell us,
I beseech thee, with how great valor and by what arts thou didst
cut off the head all hairy with serpents.” The descendant of Abas tells
them that there is a spot situate beneath cold Atlas, safe in its
bulwark of a solid mass; that, in the entrance of this, dwelt the two
sisters, the daughters of Phorcys, who shared the use of a single eye;
that he stealthily, by sly craft, while it was being handed over, 88 obtained possession of this by putting his hand in the way; and that
through rocks far remote, and pathless, and bristling with woods on
their craggy sides, he had arrived at the abodes of the Gorgons, and saw
everywhere, along the fields and the roads, statues of men and wild
beasts turned into stone, from their natural form , at the sight
of Medusa; yet that he himself, from the reflection on the brass of the
shield 89 which his left hand bore, beheld 175 IV. 783-803 the visage of the horrible Medusa; and that, while a sound sleep held
her and her serpents entranced , he took the head from off the
neck; and that Pegasus and his brother, 90 fleet with wings, were produced
from the blood of her , their mother. He added, too, the dangers
of his lengthened 155 IV. 787-803 journey, themselves no fiction; 91 what seas, what lands he had
seen beneath him from on high, and what stars he had reached with his
waving wings. Yet, before it was expected, 92 he was silent; whereupon one
of the nobles rejoined, inquiring why she alone, of the sisters, wore
snakes mingled alternately with her hair. “Stranger,” said he, “since
thou inquirest on a matter worthy to be related, hear the cause of the
thing thou inquirest after. She was the most famed for her beauty, and
the coveted hope of many wooers; nor, in the whole of her person, was
any part more worthy of notice than her hair: I have met with
some who said they had seen it. The sovereign of the sea is said to
have deflowered her in the Temple of Minerva. The daughter of Jove
turned away, and covered her chaste eyes with her shield. And that this
might not be unpunished, she changed the hair of the Gorgon into hideous
snakes. Now, too, that she may alarm her surprised foes with terror, she
bears in front upon her breast, those snakes which she thus produced .” 176 EXPLANATION. It is extremely difficult to surmise what may have given rise to many of
the fabulous circumstances here narrated. It has been conjectured by
some, that Pegasus and his brother Chrysaor, the two horses produced
from the blood of Medusa, were really two ships in the harbor of the
island where that princess was residing at the time when she was slain
by Perseus; and that, on that event, they were seized by him. Perhaps
they had the figure of a winged horse on the prow; from which
circumstance the fable had its origin. Possibly, the story of the
production of coral from the blood of Medusa may have originated in the
fact, that on the defeat of the Gorgons, navigation became more safe,
and, consequently, the fishing for coral more common that it had been
before. The story of the exposure of Andromeda may be founded on the fact, that
she was contracted by her parents against her will to some fierce,
piratical prince, who infested the adjacent seas with his depredations;
and that the betrothal was made, on condition that he should 156 allow the realms of her father, Cepheus, to be free and undisturbed;
Perseus, being informed of this, slew the pirate, and Phineus having
been kept in a state of inactivity through dread of the valor of
Perseus, it was fabled that he had been changed into a stone. This
interpretation of the story is the one suggested by Vossius. Some writers think, that Phineus, the uncle of Andromeda, was the enemy
from which she was rescued by Perseus, and who is here represented under
the form of a monster; while others suggest that this monster was the
name of the ship in which the pirate before mentioned was to have
carried away Andromeda. 1. Minyas. ]—Ver. 1. Alcithoë was the daughter of Minyas, who,
according to some, was the son of Orchomenus, according to others, his
father. Pausanias says that the Bœotians, over whom he
reigned, were called ‘Minyæ’ from him; but he makes no allusion to the
females who are here mentioned by Ovid. 2. Rites. ]—Ver. 1. ‘Orgia:’ this was the original name of the
Dionysia, or festival of Bacchus; but in time the word came to be
applied to any occasion of festivity. 3. Her sisters. ]—Ver. 3. The names of the sisters of Alcithoë,
according to Plutarch, were Aristippe and Leucippe. The names of the
three, according to Ælian, were Alcathoë , Leucippe, and
Aristippe, who is sometimes called Arsinoë. The latter author says, that
the truth of the case was, that they were decent women, fond of their
husbands and families, who preferred staying at home, and attending to
their domestic concerns, to running after the new rites; on which it was
said, by their enemies, that Bacchus had punished them. 4. Work-baskets. ]—Ver. 10. The ‘calathus,’ which was called by
the Greeks κάλαθος, καλαθίσκος , and τάλαρος , generally signifies the basket in which
women placed their work, and especially the materials used for spinning.
They were generally made of osiers and reeds, but sometimes of more
valuable materials, such as silver, perhaps in filagree work. ‘Calathi’
were also used for carrying fruits and flowers. Virgil (Ecl. v. l. 71)
speaks of cups for holding wine, under the name of ‘Calathi.’ 5. Bromius. ]—Ver. 11. Bacchus was called Bromius, from βρέμω , ‘to cry out,’ or ‘shout,’
from the yells and noise made by his worshippers, whose peculiar cries
were, Εὐοῖ Βάκχε, ὦ Ἰακχε, Ιώ Βάκχε, Εὐοῖ σαβοῖ . C ‘Evoë, Bacche!
O, Iacche! Io, Bacche! Evoë sabæ!’ 6. Lyæus. ]—Ver. 11. Bacchus was called Lyæus, from the Greek
word, λύειν , ‘to loosen,’ or ‘relax,’ because wine dispels
care. 7. That had two mothers. ]—Ver. 12. The word ‘bimater’ seems to
have been fancied by Ovid as an appropriate epithet for Bacchus, Jupiter
having undertaken the duties of a mother for him, in the latter months
of gestation. 8. Thyoneus . ]—Ver. 13. Bacchus was called
Thyoneus, either from Semele, his mother, one of whose names was Thyone,
or from the Greek, θύειν ,
‘to be frantic,’ from which origin the Bacchanals also received their
name of Thyades. 9. Lenæus. ]—Ver. 14. From the Greek word λῆνος , ‘a wine-press.’ 10. Nyctelius. ]—Ver. 15. From the Greek word νὺξ , ‘night,’ because his orgies were
celebrated by night. Eleleus is from the shout, or ‘huzza’ of the
Greeks, which was ελελεῦ . 11. Iacchus. ]—Ver. 15. From the Greek ἰαχὴ , ‘clamor,’ or ‘noise.’ 12. Evan. ]—Ver. 15. From the exclamation, Εὐοῖ , or ‘Evoë’ which the Bacchanals used in
performing his orgies. 13. Lycurgus. ]—Ver. 22. He was a king of Thrace, who having
slighted the worship of Bacchus, was afflicted with madness, and hewed
off his own legs with a hatchet, and, according to Apollodorus,
mistaking his own son Dryas for a vine, destroyed him with the same
weapon. 14. Unseasonable labor. ]—Ver. 32. ‘Minerva;’ the name of the
Goddess Minerva is here used for the exercise of the art of spinning, of
which she was the patroness. The term ‘intempestiva’ is appropriately
applied, as the arts of industry and frugality, which were first
invented by Minerva, but ill accorded with the idle and vicious mode of
celebrating the festival of Bacchus. 15. Dercetis. ]—Ver. 45. Lucian, speaking of Dercetis, or
Derceto, says, ‘I have seen in Phœnicia a statue of this goddess, of a
very singular kind. From the middle upwards, it represents a woman, but
below it terminates in a fish. The statue of her, which is shown at
Hieropolis, represents her wholly as a woman.’ He further says, that the
temple of this last city was thought by some to have been built by
Semiramis, who consecrated it not to Juno, as is generally believed, but
to her own mother, Derceto. Atergatis was another name of this Goddess.
She was said, by an illicit amour, to have been the mother of Semiramis,
and in despair, to have thrown herself into a lake near Ascalon, on
which she was changed into a fish. 16. Palestine. ]—Ver. 46. Palæstina, or Philistia, in which
Ascalon was situate, was a part of Syria, lying in its south-western
extremity. 17. How a Naiad. ]—Ver. 49. The Naiad here mentioned is supposed
to have been a Nymph of the Island of the Sun, called also Nosola,
between Taprobana (the modern Ceylon) and the coast of Carmania (perhaps
Coromandel), who was in the habit of changing such youths as fell into
her hands into fishes. As a reward for her cruelty, she herself was
changed into a fish by the Sun. 18. Most beauteous of youths. ]—Ver. 55. Clarke translates
‘juvenum pulcherrimus alter,’ ‘one of the most handsome of all the young
fellows.’ 19. Her lofty city. ]—Ver. 57. The magnificence of ancient
Babylon has been remarked by many ancient writers, from Herodotus
downwards. Its walls are said to have been 60 miles in compass, 87 feet
in thickness, and 350 feet in height. 20. Walls of brick. ]—Ver. 58. The walls were built by Semiramis
of bricks dried in the sun, cemented together with layers of
bitumen. 21. The tomb of Ninus. ]—Ver. 88. According to Diodorus Siculus,
the sepulchre of Ninus, the first king of Babylon, was ten stadia in
length, and nine in depth; it had the appearance of a vast citadel, and
was at a considerable distance from the city of Babylon. Commentators
have expressed some surprise that Ovid here uses the word ‘busta,’ for
‘tomb,’ as the place of meeting for these chaste lovers, as the
prostitutes of Rome used to haunt the ‘busta,’ or ‘tombs;’ whence they
obtained the epithet of ‘bustuariæ.’ 22. The lead decaying. ]—Ver. 122. ‘Fistula’ here means ‘a
water-pipe.’ Vitruvius speaks of three methods of conveying water; by
channels of masonry, earthen pipes, and leaden pipes. The latter were
smaller, and more generally used; to them reference is here made. They
were formed by bending plates of lead into a form, not cylindrical, but
the section of which was oblong, and tapering towards the top like a
pear. The description here given, though somewhat homely, is extremely
natural, and, as frequent experience shows us, depicts the results when
the soldering of a water-pipe has become decayed. 23. Paler than box-wood. ]—Ver. 134. From the light color of
boxwood, the words ‘buxo pallidiora,’ ‘paler than boxwood,’ became a
proverbial expression among the Romans. 24. The sea which trembles. ]—Ver. 136. The ripple, or shudder,
which runs along the surface of the sea, when a breath of wind is
stirring in a calm, is very beautifully described here, and is worthy of
notice. 25. The ivory sheath. ]—Ver. 148. The ‘vagina,’ or ‘sheath’ of
the sword, was often highly decorated; and we learn from Homer and
Virgil, as well as Ovid, that ivory was much used for that purpose. The
sheath was worn by the Greeks and Romans on the left side of the body,
so as to enable them to draw the sword from it, by passing the right
hand in front of the body, to take hold of the hilt, with the thumb next
to the blade. 26. Is black. ]—Ver. 165. He thus accounts for the deep purple
hue of the mulberry which, before the event mentioned here, he says was
white. 27. Leuconoë began. ]—Ver. 168. It is worthy of remark, how
strongly the affecting tale of Pyramus and Thisbe contrasts with the
loose story of the loves of Mars and Venus. 28. The son of Juno. ]—Ver. 173. Vulcan is called ‘Junonigena,’
because, according to some, he was the son of Juno alone. Other writers,
however, say that he was the only son of Jupiter and Juno. 29. The folding doors. ]—Ver. 185. The plural word ‘valvæ’ is
often used to signify a door, or entrance, because among the ancients
each doorway generally contained two doors folding together. The
internal doors even of private houses were bivalve; hence, as in the
present case, we often read of the folding doors of a bed-chamber. Each
of these doors or valves was usually wide enough to permit persons to
pass each other in egress and ingress without opening the other door as
well. Sometimes each valve was double, folding like our
window-shutters. 30. Cytherean. ]—Ver. 190. Cythera was an island on the southern
coast of Laconia; where Venus was supposed to have landed, after she had
risen from the sea. It was dedicated to her worship. 31. Hyperion. ]—Ver. 192. He was the son of Cœlus, or Uranus,
and the father of the Sun. The name of Hyperion is, however, often given
by the poets to the Sun himself. 32. Rhodos. ]—Ver. 204. She was a damsel of the Isle of Rhodes,
the daughter of Neptune, and, according to some, of Venus. She was
greatly beloved by Apollo, to whom she bore seven children. 33. Beauteous mother. ]—Ver. 205. This was Persa, the daughter
of Oceanus, and the mother of the enchantress Circe, who is here called
‘Ææa,’ from Ææa, a city and peninsula of Colchis. Circe is referred
to more at length in the 14th Book of the Metamorphoses. 34. Perfume-bearing. ]—Ver. 209. Being born in Arabia, the
producer of all kinds of spices and perfumes, which were much in request
among the ancients, for the purposes of sacrifice. 35. Produced. ]—Ver. 210. Eurynome was the wife of Orchamus, and
was the daughter of Oceanus and Tethys. 36. Achæmenian. ]—Ver. 212. Persia is called Achæmenian, from
Achæmenes, one of its former kings. 37. Ancient Belus. ]—Ver. 213. The order of descent is thus
reckoned from Belus; Abas, Acrisius, Danaë, Perseus , Bachæmon, Achæmenes, and
Orchamus. 38. Ambrosia. ]—Ver. 215. Ambrosia was said to be the food of
the Deities, and nectar their drink. 39. Beauty of the God. ]—Ver. 233. Clarke translates, ‘Virgo
victa nitore Dei.’ ‘The young lady—charmed with the
spruceness of the God.’ 40. For the love of the Sun. ]—Ver. 234. This remark is added,
to show that the God had not been sufficiently cautious in his courtship
of her sister to conceal it from the observation of Clytie. 41. Reach the skies. ]—Ver. 251. That is to say, ‘You shall
arise from the earth as a tree bearing frankincense: the gums of which,
burnt in sacrifice to the Gods, shall reach the heavens with their sweet
odors.’ Persia and Arabia have been celebrated by the poets, ancient and
modern, for their great fertility in frankincense and other aromatic
plants. 42. Like a violet. ]—Ver. 268. This cannot mean the large yellow
plant which is called the sunflower. The small aromatic flower which we
call heliotrope, with its violet hue and delightful perfume, more nearly
answers the description. The larger flower probably derived its name
from the resemblance which it bears to the sun, surrounded with rays, as
depicted by the ancient painters. 43. Shepherd of Ida. ]—Ver. 277. This may mean either Daphnis of
Crete, or of Phrygia; for in both those countries there was a mountain
named Ida. 44. The Curetes. ]—Ver. 282. According to Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, the Curetes were the ancient inhabitants of Crete. We may
here remark, that the story of their springing from the earth after a
shower of rain, seems to have no other foundation than the fact of their
having been of the race of the Titans; that is, they were descended from
Uranus, or Cœlus and Tita, by which names were meant the heaven and the
earth. 45. Smilax. ]—Ver. 283. The dictionary meanings given for this
word are—1. Withwind, a kind of herb. 2. The yew
tree. 3. A kind of oak. The Nymph was probably supposed to
have been changed into the first. 46. Lycian. ]—Ver. 296. Lycia was a province of Asia Minor, on
the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. Caria was another province,
adjoining to Lycia. 47. Citorian boxwood. ]—Ver. 311. Citorus, or Cythorus, was a
mountain of Paphlagonia, famous for the excellence of the wood of the
box trees that grow there. The Greeks and Romans made their combs of it.
The Egyptians used them made of ivory and wood, and toothed on one side
only; those of the Greeks had teeth on both sides. Great care was
usually taken of the hair; to go with it uncombed was a sign of
affliction. 48. The aiding cymbals. ]—Ver. 333. The witches and magicians,
in ancient times, and especially those of Thessaly, professed to be
able, with their charms and incantations, to bring the moon down from
heaven. The truth of these assertions being commonly believed, at the
period of an eclipse it was supposed by the multitude that the moon was
being subjected to the spells of these magicians, and that she was
struggling ( laborabat ) against them, on which the sound of drums,
trumpets, and cymbals was resorted to, to distract the attention of the
moon, and to drown the charms repeated by the enchanters, for which
reason, the instruments employed for the purpose were styled ‘ auxiliares .’ 49. As when the Sun. ]—Ver. 349. Bailey gives this explanation
of the passage,— ‘The eyes of the Nymph seemed to sparkle and
shine, just as the rays of the sun in a clear sky when a looking-glass
is placed against them, for then they seem most splendid, and contract
the fire.’ From the mention of the eyes of the Nymph burning ‘flagrant,’
we might be almost justified in concluding that ‘speculum’ means here
not a mirror, but a burning-glass. The ‘specula,’ or looking-glasses, of
the ancients were usually made of metal, either a composition of tin and
copper, or silver; but in later times, alloy was mixed with the silver.
Pliny mentions the obsidian stone, or, as it is now called, the
Icelandic agate, as being used for this purpose. Nero is said to have
used emeralds for mirrors. Pliny the Elder says that mirrors were made
in the glass-houses of Sidon, which consisted of glass plates, with
leaves of metal at the back; they were probably of an inferior
character. Those of copper and tin were made chiefly at Brundisium. The
white metal formed from this mixture soon becoming dim, a sponge
with powdered pumice stone was usually fastened to the mirrors made of
that composition. They were generally small, of a round or oval shape,
and having a handle; and female slaves usually held them, while their
mistresses were performing the duties of the toilet. Sometimes they were
fastened to the walls, and they were occasionally of the length of a
person’s body. Venus was supposed often to use the mirror; but Minerva
repudiated the use of it. 50. Polypus. ]—Ver. 366. This is a fish which entangles its
prey, mostly consisting of shell fish, in its great number of feet or
feelers. Ovid here calls them ‘flagella;’ but in the Halieuticon he
styles them ‘brachia’ and ‘crines.’ Pliny the Elder calls them ‘crines’
and ‘cirri.’ 51. Descendant of Atlas. ]—Ver. 368. Hermaphroditus was the
great-grandson of Atlas; as the latter was the father of Maia, the
mother of Mercury, who begot Hermaphroditus. 52. The two are united. ]—Ver. 374. Clarke translates, ‘nam
mixta duorum corpora junguntur,’ ‘for the bodies of both, being jumbled
together, are united.’ 53. Derive their name. ]—Ver. 415. In Greek they are called νυκτερίδες , from νυξ , ‘night;’ and in Latin,
‘vespertiliones,’ from ‘vesper,’ ‘evening,’ on account of their
habits. 54. She alone. ]—Ver. 419. This was Ino, whose only sorrows
hitherto had been caused by the calamities which befell her sisters and
their offspring: Semele having died a shocking death, Autonoë having
seen her son Actæon changed into a stag, and then devoured by his dogs,
and Agave having assisted in tearing to pieces her own son Pentheus. 55. When they have enjoyed. ]—Ver. 435. The spirits whose bodies
had not received the rites of burial, we learn from Homer and Virgil,
were not allowed to pass the river Styx, but wandered on its banks for a
hundred years. 56. So does that spot. ]—Ver. 441. That is to say, whatever
number of ghosts arrives there, it receives them all with ease, and is
not sensible of the increase of number; either because the place itself
is of such immense extent, or because the souls of the dead do not
occupy space. 57. The Sisters. ]—Ver. 450. These were the Furies , fabled to be the
daughters of Night and Acheron. They were three in number, Tisiphone,
Alecto, and Megæra, and were supposed to be the avengers of crime and
wickedness. 58. Tityus. ]—Ver. 456. Tityus was the son of Jupiter and Elara.
On account of his enormous size, the poets sometimes style him a son of
the earth. Attempting to commit violence upon Latona, he was slain by
the arrows of Apollo, and precipitated to the infernal regions, where he
was condemned to have his liver constantly devoured by a vulture, and
then renewed, to perpetuate his torments. 59. Tantalus. ]—Ver. 457. He was the son of Jupiter, by the
Nymph Plote. The crime for which he was punished is differently related
by the poets. Some say, that he divulged the secrets of the Gods, that
had been entrusted to him; while others relate, that at an entertainment
which he gave to the Deities, he caused his own son, Pelops, to be
served up, on which Ceres inadvertently ate his shoulder. He was doomed
to suffer intense hunger and thirst, amid provisions of all kinds within
his reach, which perpetually receded from him. 60. Sisyphus. ]—Ver. 459. Sisyphus, the son of Æolus, was a
daring robber, who infested Attica. He was slain by Theseus; and being
sent to the infernal regions, was condemned to the punishment of rolling
a great stone to the top of a mountain, which it had no sooner reached
than it fell down again, and renewed his labor. 61. Ixion. ]—Ver. 461. Being advanced by Jupiter to heaven, he
presumed to make an attempt on Juno. Jupiter, to deceive him, formed a
cloud in her shape, on which Ixion begot the Centaurs. He was cast into
Tartarus, and was there fastened to a wheel, which turned round
incessantly. 62. Iris. ]—Ver. 480. Iris was the daughter of Thaumas and
Electra, and the messenger of Juno. She was the Goddess of the
Rainbow. 63. Tisiphone. ]—Ver. 481. Clarke translates ‘Tisiphone importuna ,’
‘the plaguy Tisiphone.’ 64. Echidna. ]—Ver. 501. This word properly means,
‘a female viper;’ but it here refers to the Hydra, or dragon of the
marsh of Lerna, which Hercules slew. It was fabled to be partly a woman,
and partly a serpent, and to have been begotten by Typhon. According to
some accounts, this monster had seven heads. 65. Dashes in pieces. ]—Ver. 519. Euripides and Hyginus relate,
that Athamas slew his son while hunting; and Apollodorus says, that he
mistook him for a stag. 66. Thy foster-child. ]—Ver. 524. Bacchus was the foster-child
of Ino, who was the sister of his mother Semele. The remaining portion
of the story of Ino and Melicerta is again related by Ovid in the sixth
book of the Fasti. 67. There is a rock. ]—Ver. 525. Pausanias calls this the
Molarian rock, and says, that it was one of the Scironian rocks, near
Megara, in Attica. It was a branch of the Geranian mountain. 68. And her burden. ]—Ver. 530. This was her son Melicerta, who,
according to Pausanias, was received by dolphins, and was landed by them
on the isthmus of Corinth. 69. Guiltless granddaughter . ]—Ver. 531. Venus was the
grandmother of Ino, inasmuch as Hermione, or Harmonia, the wife of
Cadmus, was the daughter of Mars and Venus. 70. Boundless Ionian sea. ]—Ver. 535. The Ionian sea must be
merely mentioned here as a general name for the broad expanse of waters,
of which the Saronic gulf, into which the Molarian rock projected,
formed part. Ovid may, however, mean to say that Ino threw herself from
some rock in the Ionian sea, and not from the Molarian rock; following,
probably, the account of some other writer, whose works are lost. 71. Grecian name is derived. ]—Ver. 538. Venus was called
Aphrodite, by the Greeks, from ἄφρος , ‘the foam of the sea,’ from which she was said to
have sprung. 72. A Divinity. ]—Ver. 542. Ino and Melicerta were worshipped as
Divinities both in Greece and at Rome. 73. Sidonian attendants. ]—Ver. 543. The Theban matrons are
meant, who had married the companions of Cadmus that accompanied him
from Phœnices. 74. Son of Abas. ]—Ver. 608. Acrisius was the son of Abas, king
of Argos. He was the father of Danaë, by whom Jupiter was the father of
Perseus. 75. Of the same race. ]—Ver. 607. Some suppose that by this it
is meant that as Belus, the father of Abas, and grandfather of Acrisius,
was the son of Jupiter, who was also the father of Bacchus, the latter
and Acrisius were consequently related. 76. A huge dragon. ]—Ver. 647. The name of the dragon was
Ladon. 77. Hippotas. ]—Ver. 663. Æolus, the God of the Winds, was the
son of Jupiter, by Acesta, the daughter of Hippotas. 78. Ammon. ]—Ver. 671. Jupiter, with the surname of Ammon, had a
temple in the deserts of Libya, where he was worshipped under the shape
of a ram; a form which he was supposed to have assumed, when, in
common with the other Deities, he fled from the attacks of the Giants.
The oracle of Jupiter Ammon being consulted relative to the sea monster,
which Neptune, at the request of the Nereids, had sent against the
Ethiopians, answered that Andromeda must be exposed to be devoured by
it; which Ovid here, not without reason, calls an unjust demand. 79. Mother’s tongue. ]—Ver. 670. Cassiope, the mother of
Andromeda, had dared to compare her own beauty with that of the Nereids.
Cepheus, the son of Phœnix, was the father of Andromeda. 80. Warm. ]—Ver. 674. ‘Tepido,’ ‘warm,’ is decidedly preferable
here to ‘trepido,’ ‘trembling.’ 81. Dare address. ]—Ver. 682. Heinsius thinks that ‘appellare’
here is not the correct reading; and suggests ‘aspectare,’ which seems
to be more consistent with the sense of the passage, which would then
be, ‘and does not dare to look down upon the hero.’ 82. Monster approaching. ]—Ver. 689. Pliny the Elder and Solinus
tell us that the bones of this monster were afterwards brought from
Joppa, a seaport of Judæa, to Rome, and that the skeleton was forty
feet in length, and the spinal bone was six feet in circumference. 83. The perspiring arms. ]—Ver. 707. ‘Juvenum sudantibus acta
lacertis’ is translated by Clarke, ‘forced forward by the arms of
sweating young fellows.’ 84. Bird of Jupiter. ]—Ver. 714. The eagle was the bird sacred
to Jove. The larger kinds of birds which afforded auguries from their
mode of flight, were called ‘ præpetes .’ 85. Avoids the eager bites. ]—Ver. 723. Clarke translates this
line, ‘He avoids the monster’s eager snaps with his swift wings.’ 86. His dripping pinions. ]—Ver. 730. ‘Talaria’ were either
wings fitted to the ankles, or shoes having such wings fastened to them;
they were supposed to be usually worn by Mercury. 87. Clinging to the upper ridge. ]—Ver. 733. ‘Tenens juga prima
sinistra’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘seizing the tip-top of it with his
left hand.’ 88. Being handed over. ]—Ver. 766. Of course, as they had but
one eye between them, they must have both been blind while it was
passing from one hand to another, so that Perseus could have had but
little difficulty in effecting the theft here mentioned. 89. Brass of the shield. ]—Ver. 783. This reflecting shield
Perseus is said to have received from Minerva, and by virtue of it he
was enabled to see without being seen. Lucian says that Minerva herself
held this reflecting shield before him, and by that means afforded him
the opportunity of seeing the reflection of Medusa’s figure; and that
Perseus, seizing her by the hair with his left hand, and keeping his eye
fixed on the image reflected in the shield, took his sword in his right,
and cut off her head, and then, by the aid of his wings, flew away
before the other Gorgon sisters were aware of what he had done. 90. Pegasus and his brother. ]—Ver. 786. Pegasus and Chrysaor
were two winged horses, which were fabled to have sprung up from the
blood of Medusa, when slain by Perseus. 91. Themselves no fiction. ]—Ver. 787. His dangers were not
false or imaginary, inasmuch as he was pursued by Sthenyo and Euryale,
the sisters of Medusa, who were fabled to have wings, and claws of iron
on their hands. Ovid deals a sly hit in the words ‘non falsa pericula
cursus,’ at the tales of travellers, who, even in his day, seem to have
commenced dealing in the marvellous; as, indeed, we may learn for
ourselves, on turning to the pages of Herodotus, who seems to have been
often imposed upon. 92. Before it was expected. ]—Ver. 790. Showing thereby how
delighted his audience was with his narrative. Supplementary Notes ( added by transcriber ) A. what madness can do : “madness” is the grammatical subject. Ovid
IV.429 “quidque furor valeat”. B. the hollowed deep : Ovid IV.537 is variously read as “in medio ...
profundo”, “immenso ... profundo” and “in dīo ... profundo”. The Bell
text “the hallowed deep” can only be based on the rare “dio” reading. C. Εὐοῖ Βάκχε, ὦ Ἰακχε, Ιώ Βάκχε, Εὐοῖ σαβοῖ : Text given as
printed. The exact form (with consistent capitalization) is probably
Εὐοῖ Βάκχε, Ὦ Ἴακχε, Ἰώ Βάκχε, Εὐοῖ σαβαῖ . 177 157 BOOK THE FIFTH. FABLE I. While Perseus is continuing the
relation of the adventures of Medusa, Phineus, to whom Andromeda has
been previously promised in marriage, rushes into the palace, with his
adherents, and attacks his rival. A furious combat is the
consequence, in which Perseus gives signal proofs of his valor. At
length, perceiving himself likely to be overpowered by the number of his
enemies, he shows them the head of the Gorgon; on which Phineus and his
followers are turned into statues of stone. After this victory, he takes
Andromeda with him to Argos, his native city, where he turns the usurper
Prœtus into stone, and re-establishes his grandfather Acrisius on the
throne. And while the hero, the son of
Danaë, is relating these things in the midst of the company of the
subjects of Cepheus, the royal courts are filled with a raging
multitude; nor is the clamor such as celebrates a marriage-feast, but
one which portends dreadful warfare. You might compare the banquet,
changed into a sudden tumult, to the sea, which, when calm, the
boisterous rage of the winds disturbs by raising its waves. Foremost among these, Phineus, 1 the rash projector of the onslaught,
shaking an ashen spear with a brazen point, cries, “Behold! now ,
behold! I am come, the avenger of my wife, ravished from me;
neither shall thy wings nor Jupiter turned into fictitious gold, deliver
thee from me.” As he is endeavoring to hurl his lance , Cepheus
cries out, “What art thou doing? What fancy, my brother, impels thee, in
thy madness, to this crime? Is this the due acknowledgment to return 178 V. 14-39 for deserts so great? Dost thou repay the life of her thus preserved, with this reward? ’Twas not Perseus, if thou wouldst know the
truth, that took her away from thee; but the incensed 158 V. 16-45 majesty of the Nereids, and horned Ammon, and the monster of the sea,
which came to be glutted with my bowels. She was snatched from thee at
that moment, at which she was to have perished; unless it is that thou
dost, in thy cruelty, insist upon that very thing, that she should
perish, and wilt be appeased only by my affliction. It is not enough,
forsooth, that in thy presence she was bound and that thou, both her uncle and
her betrothed, didst give no assistance; wilt thou be grieving, besides,
that she was saved by another, and wilt thou deprive him of his reward?
If this appears great to thee, thou shouldst have recovered it from the
rock to which it was fastened. Now, let him who has recovered it,
through whom my old age is not childless, have what he stipulated for,
both by his merits and his words; and know that he was preferred not before thee,
but before certain death.” Phineus said nothing, on the other hand; but viewing both him
and Perseus, with alternate looks, he was uncertain whether he should first attack the one or the other; and, having paused a short
time, he vainly threw his spear, hurled with all the force that rage
afforded. As it stood fixed in the cushion, 2 then, at length, Perseus
leapt off from the couch, and in his rage would have pierced the breast
of his enemy with the weapon, thrown back, had not Phineus gone behind
an altar, and thus (how unworthily!) an altar 3 protected a
miscreant. However, the spear, not thrown in vain, stuck in the forehead
of Rhœtus; who, after he fell, and the steel was wrenched from the
skull, he 179 V. 40-68 still struggled, and besprinkled the laid tables with his blood.
But then does the multitude burst forth into ungovernable rage, and hurl
their weapons. Some there are, who say that Cepheus ought to die with
his son-in-law; but Cepheus has gone out by the entrance of the house,
calling right and good faith to witness, and the Gods of hospitality, 4 that
this disturbance is 159 V. 45-77 made contrary to his will. The warlike Pallas comes; and with her shield
protects her brother Perseus , and gives him courage. There was an
Indian, Athis by name , 5 whom Limnate, the daughter of the river
Ganges, is believed to have brought forth beneath the glassy waters;
excelling in beauty, which he improved by his rich dress; in his prime,
as yet but twice eight years of age, dressed in a purple tunic, which a
golden fringe bordered; a gilded necklace graced his neck, and a
curved hair-pin his hair wet with myrrh. He, indeed, had been taught to
hit things, although at a distance, with his hurled javelin, but he
was more skilled at bending the bow. Perseus struck him even
then, as he was bending with his hands the flexible horns of a
bow , with a billet, which, placed in the middle of the altar, was
smoking, and he crushed his face into his broken skull. When the Assyrian Lycabas, who was a most attached friend of his, and
no concealer of his real affection, saw him rolling his features, the
objects of such praises, in his blood; after he had bewailed Athis,
breathing forth his life from this cruel wound, he seized the bow which
he had bent, and said, “And now let the contest against thee be
with me; not long shalt thou exult in the fate of the youth, by which
thou acquirest more hatred than praise.” All this he had not yet said, when the piercing weapon darted from the string, and though avoided, still it hung in the folds of his garment. The
grandson of Acrisius turned against 180 V. 69-94 him his falchion, 6 already proved in the slaughter of Medusa, and
thrust it into his breast. But he, now dying, with his eyes swimming in
black night, looked around for Athis, and sank upon him, and carried to
the shades the consolation of a united death. Lo! Phorbas of Syene, 7 the
son of Methion, and Amphimedon, the Libyan, eager to engage in the
fight, fell down, slipping in the blood with which the earth was warm,
soaked on every side; as they 160 V. 77-107 arose the sword met them, being thrust in the ribs of the one, and in the throat of Phorbas. But Perseus does not attack
Erithus, the son of Actor, whose weapon is a broad battle-axe, by using
his sword, but he takes up, with both hands, a huge bowl, 8 standing out
with figures deeply embossed, and of vast mass in its weight, and hurls
it against the man. The other vomits forth red blood, and, falling on
his back, beats the ground with his dying head. Then he slays Polydæmon,
sprung from the blood of Semiramis, and the Caucasian Abaris, and
Lycetus, the son of Sperchius, 9 and Elyces, with unshorn locks, and
Phlegias, and Clytus; and he tramples upon the heaps of the dying, which
he has piled up. But Phineus, not daring to engage hand to hand with his enemy, hurls
his javelin, which accident carries against Idas, who, in vain, has
declined the warfare 10 and has followed the arms of neither. He,
looking at the cruel Phineus with stern eyes, says, “Since I am thus forced to take a side, take the enemy, Phineus, that thou
hast made, and make amends for my wound with this wound.” And now, just
about to return the 181 V. 95-123 dart drawn from his body, he falls sinking down upon his limbs void of
blood. Here, too, Odytes, the next in rank among the followers of
Cepheus, after the king, lies prostrate under the sword of Clymenus;
Hypseus kills Protenor, and Lyncides Hypseus. There is, too,
among them the aged Emathion, an observer of justice, and a fearer of
the Gods; as his years prevent him from fighting, he engages by talking,
and he condemns and utters imprecations against their accursed arms. As
he clings to the altars 11 with trembling hands, Chromis cuts off his
head with his sword, which straightway falls upon the altar, and there,
with his dying tongue he utters words of execration, and breathes forth
his soul in the midst of the fires. Upon this, two brothers, Broteas and 161 V. 107-138 Ammon invincible at boxing, if swords could only be conquered by boxing,
fell by the hand of Phineus; Ampycus, too, the priest of Ceres, having
his temples wreathed with a white fillet. Thou too, son of Iapetus, not
to be employed for these services; but one who tuned the lyre, the work
of peace, to thy voice, hadst been ordered to attend the banquet and
festival with thy music. As thou art standing afar, and holding the
unwarlike plectrum, Pettalus says, laughing, “Go sing the rest to the
Stygian ghosts,” and fixes the point of the sword in his left temple. He
falls, and with his dying fingers he touches once again the strings of
the lyre; and in his fall he plays a mournful dirge. 12 The fierce
Lycormas does not suffer him to fall unpunished; and tearing away a
massive bar from the doorpost on the right, he dashes it against the
bones of the middle of the neck of Pettalus ; struck, he falls to the
ground, just like a slaughtered bullock. The Cinyphian 13 Pelates, too, was trying to tear away the oaken bar
of the doorpost on the left; as he was 182 V. 123-151 trying, his right hand was fastened thereto by the spear of
Corythus, the son of Marmarus, and it stood riveted to the wood. Thus riveted, Abas pierced his side; he did not fall, however,
but dying, hung from the post, which still held fast his hand. Melaneus,
too, was slain, who had followed the camp of Perseus, and Dorylas, very
rich in Nasamonian land. 14 Dorylas, rich in land, than whom no one
possessed it of wider extent, or received thence so many heaps of
corn. The hurled steel stood fixed obliquely in his groin; the hurt was
mortal. When the Bactrian 15 Halcyoneus, the author of the wound,
beheld him sobbing forth his soul, and rolling his eyes, he said, “Take for thine own this spot of earth which thou dost press,
out of so many fields,” and he left his lifeless body. The descendant of
Abas, as his avenger, hurls against Halcyoneus the spear torn
from his wound yet warm, which, received in the middle of the
nostrils, 162 V. 139-167 pierced through his neck, and projected on both sides. And while fortune
is aiding his hand, he slays, with different wounds, Clytius and Clanis,
born of one mother. For an ashen spear poised with a strong arm is
driven through both the thighs of Clytius; with his mouth does Clanis
bite the javelin. Celadon, the Mendesian, 16 falls, too; Astreus
falls, born of a mother of Palestine, but of an uncertain father.
Æthion, too, once sagacious at foreseeing things to come, but now
deceived 17 by a false omen; and Thoactes, the armor-bearer
of the king, and Agyrtes, infamous for slaying his father. More work still remains, than what is already done; for it is
the intention of all to overwhelm one. The conspiring troops fight on
all sides, for a cause that 183 V. 151-176 attacks both merit and good faith. The one side, the father-in-law,
attached in vain, and the new-made wife, together with her mother,
encourage; and these fill the halls with their shrieks. But the
din of arms, and the groans of those that fall, prevail; and for once,
Bellona 18 is deluging the household Gods polluted with
plenteous blood, and is kindling the combat anew. Phineus, and a
thousand that follow Phineus, surround Perseus alone ; darts are
flying thicker than the hail of winter, on both his sides, past his
eyes, and past his ears. On this, he places his shoulders against the
stone of a large pillar, and, having his back secure, and facing the
adverse throng, he withstands their attack. Chaonian 19 Molpeus
presses on the left, Nabathæan Ethemon on the right. As a tiger, urged
on by hunger, when it hears the lowings of two herds, in different
valleys, knows not on which side in preference to rush out, and yet is eager to rush out on both; so Perseus, being in doubt
whether to bear onward to the right 163 V. 167-203 or to the left, repulses Molpeus by a wound in the leg, which he runs
through, and is contented with his flight. Nor, indeed, does Ethemon
give him time, but fiercely attacks him; and, desirous to inflict a
wound deep in his neck, he breaks his sword, wielded with incautious
force; and against the extremity of a column which he has struck, the
blade flies to pieces, and sticks in the throat of its owner; yet that
blow has not power sufficient to effect his death. Perseus stabs
him with his Cyllenian 20 falchion, trembling, and vainly extending his
unarmed hands. But when Perseus saw his valor likely to yield to such 184 V. 177-209 numbers, he said, “Since you yourselves force me to do it, I will
seek assistance from an enemy: turn away your faces, if any of my
friends are here;” and then he produced the head of the Gorgon.
“ Go , seek some one else,” said Thescelus, “for thy miracles to
affect;” and, as he was preparing to hurl his deadly javelin with his
hand, he stood fast in that posture, a statue of marble. Ampyx,
being next him, made a pass with his sword at the breast of Lyncidas,
full of daring spirit, and, while making it, his right hand became
stiff, moving neither to one side nor the other. But Nileus, who had
falsely boasted that he was begotten by the seven-mouthed Nile, and who
had engraved on his shield its seven channels, partly in silver, partly
in gold, said, “Behold, Perseus, the origin of my race; thou shalt carry
to the silent shades a great consolation for thy death, that thou wast
killed by one so great.” The last part of his address was suppressed in
the midst of the utterance; and you would think his half-open mouth was
attempting to speak, but it gave no passage for his words. Eryx rebuked
them, 21 and said, “Ye are benumbed by the cowardice of your
minds, not by the locks of the Gorgon; rush on with me, and strike to
the ground this youth that wields his magic arms.” He was about
to rush on, when the earth arrested his steps, and he remained an
immovable stone, and an armed statue. But all these met with the
punishment they had deserved: there was one man, however, Aconteus by
name , a soldier of Perseus, for whom while he was fighting, on
beholding the Gorgon, he grew hard with stone rising upon him. Astyages, 164 V. 203-239 thinking him still alive, struck him with his long sword; the sword
resounded with a shrill ringing. While Astyages was in amazement, he
took on himself the same nature: and the look of one in surprise
remained on his marble features. It is a tedious task to recount the
names of the men of the lower rank. Two hundred bodies were yet remaining for the fight: two hundred bodies, on beholding the Gorgon,
grew stiff. 185 V. 210-240 Now at length Phineus repents of this unjust warfare. But what can he
do? He sees statues varying in form, and he recognizes his friends, and
demands help of them each, called by name; and not yet persuaded,
he touches the bodies next him; they are marble. He turns away his
eyes ; and thus suppliant, and stretching forth his hands, that
confessed his fault , and his arms obliquely extended, he says,
“Perseus, thou hast conquered; remove the direful monster, and take away
that stone-making face of thy Medusa, whatever she may be; take it away,
I pray. It is not hatred, or the desire of a kingdom, that has
urged me to war: for a wife I wielded arms. Thy cause was the better in
point of merit, mine in point of time. I am not sorry to yield.
Grant me nothing, most valiant man, beyond this life; the rest be
thine.” Upon his saying such things, and not daring to look upon him,
whom he is entreating with his voice, Perseus says, “What am I
able to give thee, most cowardly Phineus, and, a great boon to a
craven, that will I give; lay aside thy fears; thou shalt be hurt by no
weapon. Moreover, I will give thee a monument to last forever, and
in the house of my father-in-law thou shalt always be seen, that my wife
may comfort herself with the form of her betrothed.” Thus he
said, and he turned the daughter of Phorcys to that side, towards which
Phineus had turned himself with trembling face. Then, even as he
endeavored to turn away his eyes, his neck grew stiff, and the moisture
of his eyes hardened in stone. But yet his timid features, and his
suppliant countenance, and his hands hanging down, and his guilty
attitude, still remained. The descendant of Abas, together with his wife, enters the walls of
his native city; and as the defender and avenger of his innocent mother,
he attacks Prœtus. 22 For, his brother being expelled by force of arms,
Prœtus had taken possession 165 V. 239-243 of the citadel of Acrisius; but neither by the help of arms, nor the
citadel which he 186 V. 240-242 had unjustly seized, did he prevail against the stern eyes of the
snake-bearing monster. EXPLANATION. The scene of this story is supposed by some to have been in Æthiopia,
but it is more probably on the coast of Africa. Josephus and Strabo
assert that this event happened near the city of Joppa, or Jaffa:
indeed, Josephus says that the marks of the chains with which Andromeda
was fastened, were remaining on the rock in his time. Pomponius Mela
says, that Cepheus, the father of Andromeda, was king of Joppa, and that
the memory of that prince and of his brother Phineus was honored there
with religious services. He says, too, that the inhabitants used to show
the bones of the monster which was to have devoured Andromeda. Pliny
tells us the same, and that Scaurus carried these bones with him to
Rome. He calls the monster ‘a Goddess,’ ‘Dea Cete.’ Vossius believes
that he means the God Dagon, worshipped among the Syrians under the
figure of a fish, or sea-monster. Some authors have suggested that the
story of the creature which was to have devoured Andromeda, was a
confused version of that of the prophet Jonah. The alleged power of Perseus, to turn his enemies into stone, was
probably, a metaphorical mode of describing his heroism, and the
terror which everywhere followed the fame of his victory over the
Gorgons. This probably caused such consternation, that it was reported
that he petrified his enemies by showing them the head of Medusa.
Bochart supposes that the rocky nature of the island of Seriphus, where
Polydectes reigned, was the ground of the various stories of the alleged
metamorphoses into stone, effected by means of the Gorgon’s head. FABLE II. Polydectes continues his hatred against
Perseus, and treats his victories and triumphs over Medusa as mere
fictions, on which Perseus turns him into stone. Minerva leaves her
brother, and goes to Mount Helicon to visit the Muses, who show the
Goddess the beauties of their habitation, and entertain her with their
adventure at the court of Pyreneus, and the death of that prince. They
also repeat to her the song of the Pierides, who challenged them to
sing. Yet , O Polydectes, 23 the ruler of
little Seriphus, 187 V. 243-264 neither the 166 V. 243-266 valor of the youth proved by so many toils, nor his sorrows have
softened thee; but thou obstinately dost exert an inexorable hatred, nor
is there any limit to thy unjust resentment. Thou also detractest from
his praises, and dost allege that the death of Medusa is but a
fiction. “We will give thee a proof of the truth,” says Perseus; “have a
regard for your eyes, all besides ;” and he makes the face of the
king become stone, without blood, by means of the face of
Medusa. Hitherto Tritonia had presented herself as a companion to her
brother, 24 begotten in the golden shower. Now, enwrapped in an
encircling cloud, she abandons Seriphus, Cythnus and Gyarus 25 being
left on the right. And where the way seems the shortest over the sea,
she makes for Thebes and Helicon, frequented by the virgin Muses ;
having reached which mountain she stops, and thus addresses the learned
sisters: “The fame of the new fountain 26 has reached my ears, which the
hard hoof of the winged steed sprung from the blood of Medusa has
opened. That is the cause of my coming. I wished to see this
wondrous prodigy; I saw him spring from the blood of his mother.”
Urania 27 replies, “Whatever, Goddess, is the cause of thy
visiting these abodes, thou art most acceptable to our feelings.
However, the report is true, and Pegasus is the originator of this
spring;” and then she conducts Pallas to the sacred 188 V. 265-290 streams. She, long admiring the waters produced by the stroke of his
foot, looks around upon the groves of the ancient wood, and the caves
and the grass 167 V. 266-295 studded with flowers innumerable; and she pronounces the Mnemonian 28 maids happy both in their pursuits and in their retreat; when one of the
sisters thus addresses her: “O Tritonia, thou who wouldst have come to make one of our number,
had not thy valor inclined thee to greater deeds, thou sayest the truth,
and with justice thou dost approve both our pursuits and our retreat;
and if we are but safe, happy do we reckon our lot. But (to such a
degree is no denial borne by villany ) all things affright our virgin minds, and the
dreadful Pyreneus is placed before our eyes; and not yet have I wholly
recovered my presence of mind. He, in his insolence, had taken the
Daulian and Phocean 29 land with his Thracian troops, and unjustly held
the government. We were making for the temple of Parnassus; he beheld us
going, and adoring our Divinities 30 in a feigned worship he said (for he
had recognized us), ‘O Mnemonian maids, stop, and do not scruple,
I pray, under my roof to avoid the bad weather and the showers (for
it was raining); oft have the Gods above entered more humble
cottages .’ Moved by his invitation and the weather, we assented to
the man, and entered the front part of his house. The rain had now ceased, and the South Wind now subdued by the North,
the black clouds were flying from the cleared sky. It was our wish to
depart. Pyreneus closed his house, and prepared for violence, which we
escaped by taking wing. He himself stood aloft on the top of his
abode , as though about to follow us, and said ‘Wherever there is a
way for you, by the same road there will be one for me.’ 189 V. 292-312 And then, in his insanity, he threw himself from the height of the
summit of the tower, and fell upon his face, and with the bones of his
skull thus broken, he struck the ground stained with his accursed
blood.” Thus spoke the Muse. Wings resounded through the air, and a
voice of some saluting them 31 came from the lofty 168 V. 293-321 boughs. The daughter of Jupiter looked up, and asked whence tongues that
speak so distinctly made that noise, and thought that a human being had
spoken. They were birds; and magpies that imitate everything, lamenting
their fate, they stood perched on the boughs, nine in number. As the
Goddess wondered, thus did the Goddess Urania commence: “Lately,
too, did these being overcome in a dispute, increase the number of the
birds. Pierus, rich in the lands of Pella, 32 begot them; the
Pæonian 33 Evippe 34 was their mother. Nine times did she
invoke the powerful Lucina, being nine times in labor. This set of
foolish sisters were proud of their number, and came hither through so
many cities of Hæmonia, and through so many of Achaia, 35 and
engaged in a contest in words such as these: “Cease imposing upon the
vulgar with your empty melody. If you have any confidence in your
skill , ye Thespian Goddesses, contend with us; we will not be
outdone in voice or skill; and we are as many in number. Either, if
vanquished, withdraw from the spring formed by the steed of Medusa, and
the Hyantean Aganippe, 36 or we 190 V. 313-339 will retire from the Emathian plains, as far as the snowy Pæonians. Let
the Nymphs decide the contest .” It was, indeed, disgraceful to
engage, but to yield seemed even more disgraceful. The Nymphs
that are chosen swear by the rivers, and they sit on seats made out of
the natural rock. Then, without casting lots, she who had been the first
to propose the contest, sings the wars of the Gods above, and gives the
Giants honor not their due, and detracts from the actions of the great
Divinities; and sings how that Typhœus, sent forth from the
lowest realms of 169 V. 321-340 the earth, had struck terror into the inhabitants of Heaven; and how they had all turned their backs in flight, until the land of
Egypt had received them in their weariness, and the Nile, divided into
its seven mouths. She tells, how that Typhœus had come there, too, and
the Gods above had concealed themselves under assumed shapes; and
‘Jupiter,’ she says, ‘becomes the leader of the flock, whence, even at
the present day, the Libyan Ammon is figured with horns. Apollo ,
the Delian God , lies concealed as a crow, the son of Semele as a
he-goat, the sister of Phœbus as a cat, Juno , the daughter of
Saturn, as a snow-white cow, Venus as a fish, 37 Mercury , the
Cyllenian God , beneath the wings of an Ibis.’ 38 “Thus far she had exerted her noisy mouth to the sound of the
lyre; we of Aonia 39 were then called upon; but perhaps thou hast
not the leisure, nor the time to lend an ear to our strains.” Pallas
says, “Do not hesitate, and repeat your song to me in its order;” and
she takes her seat under the pleasant shade of the grove. The Muse then tells her story. “We assigned the management of the contest
to one of our number . Calliope rises, and, having her long hair
gathered up with ivy, tunes with her thumb the sounding chords; and then 191 V. 340-350 sings these lines in concert with the strings when struck.” EXPLANATION. According to Plutarch, the adventure of the Muses with Pyreneus, and of
their asking wings of the Gods to save themselves, is a metaphor, which
shows that he, when reigning in Phocis, was no friend to learning. As he
had caused all the institutions in which it was taught to be destroyed,
it was currently reported, that he had offered violence to the Muses,
and that he lost his life in pursuing them. Ovid is the only writer that
mentions him by name. The challenge given by the Pierides to the Muses is not mentioned by any
writer before the time of Ovid. By way of explaining it, it is said,
that Pierus was a very bad poet, whose works were full of stories
injurious to the credit of the Gods. Hence, in time, it became
circulated, that his 170 V. 341-358 daughters, otherwise his works, were changed into magpies, thereby
meaning that they were full of idle narratives, tiresome and unmeaning.
It is not improbable that the story of Typhœus, who forces the Gods to
conceal themselves in Egypt, under the forms of various animals, was a
poem which Pierus composed on the war of the Gods with the Giants. FABLE III. One of the Muses repeats to Minerva the
song of Calliope, in answer to the Pierides; in which she describes the
defeat of the Giant Typhœus, and Pluto viewing the mountains of Sicily,
where Venus persuades her son Cupid to pierce his heart with one of his
arrows. “ Ceres was the first to turn up the
clods with the crooked plough; she first gave corn and wholesome food to
the earth; she first gave laws; everything is the gift of Ceres. She is
to be sung by me; I only wish that I could utter verses worthy of
the Goddess, for doubtless she is a Goddess worthy of my song.
The vast island of Trinacria 40 is heaped up on the limbs of the
Giant, and keeps down Typhœus, that dared to hope for the abodes of
Heaven, placed beneath its heavy mass. He, indeed, struggles, and
attempts often to rise, but his right hand is placed beneath the
Ausonian 192 V. 350-373 Pelorus, 41 his left under thee, Pachynus; 42 his legs are pressed
down by Lilybœum; 43 Ætna bears down his head; under it Typhœus, on his
back, casts forth sand, and vomits flame from his raging mouth; often
does he struggle to throw off the load of earth, and to roll away cities
and huge mountains from his body. Then does the earth tremble, and the
King of the shades himself is in dread, lest it may open, and the ground
be parted with a wide chasm, and, the day being let in, may affright the
trembling ghosts. 171 V. 359-384 “Fearing this ruin, the Ruler had gone out from his dark abode; and,
carried in his chariot by black horses, he cautiously surveyed the
foundations of the Sicilian land. After it was sufficiently ascertained
that no place was insecure, and fear was laid aside, Erycina, 44 sitting
down upon her mountain, saw him wandering; and, embracing her winged
son, she said, Cupid, my son, my arms, my hands, and my might, take up
those darts by which thou conquerest all, and direct the swift arrows
against the breast of the God, to whom fell the last lot of the triple
kingdom. 45 Thou subduest the Gods above, and Jupiter himself;
thou subduest the conquered Deities of the deep, and him who
rules over the Deities of the deep. Why is Tartarus exempt? Why dost
thou not extend the Empire of thy mother and thine own? A third
part of the world is now at stake. And yet so great power is
despised even in our own heaven, and, together with myself, the
influence 193 V. 374-385 of Love becomes but a trifling matter. Dost thou not see how that
Pallas, and Diana, who throws the javelin, have renounced me? The
daughter of Ceres, too, will be a virgin, if we shall permit it, for she
inclines to similar hopes. But do thou join the Goddess to her uncle, if
I have any interest with thee in favor of our joint sway. “Venus thus spoke. He opened his quiver, and, by the direction
of his mother, set apart one out of his thousand arrows; but one, than
which there is not any more sharp or less unerring, or which is more
true to the bow. And he bent the flexible horn, by pressing his knee
against it, and struck Pluto in the breast with the barbed arrow.” EXPLANATION. The ancients frequently accounted for natural phænomena on fabulous
grounds: and whatever they found difficult to explain, from their
ignorance of the principles of natural philosophy, they immediately
attributed to the agency of a supernatural cause. Ætna was often seen to
emit flames, and the earth was subjected to violent shocks from the
forces of its internal 172 V. 385-390 fires when struggling for a vent. Instead of looking for the source of
these eruptions in the sulphur and bituminous matter in which the
mountain abounds, they fabled, that the Gods, having vanquished the
Giant Typhœus, or, according to some authors, Enceladus, threw Mount
Ætna on his body; and that the attempts he made to free himself from the
superincumbent weight were the cause of those fires and earthquakes. FABLE IV. Pluto surprises Proserpina in the
fields of Henna, and carries her away by force. The Nymph Cyane
endeavors, in vain, to stop him in his passage, and through grief and
anguish, dissolves into a fountain. Ceres goes everywhere in search of
her daughter, and, in her journey, turns the boy Stellio into a
newt. “ Not far from the walls of Henna 46 there is a lake 194 V. 386-400 of deep water, Pergus by name; Cayster does not hear more songs of
swans, in his running streams, than that. A wood skirts the lake,
surrounding it on every side, and with its foliage, as though with an
awning, keeps out the rays of the sun. The boughs produce a coolness,
the moist ground flowers of Tyrian 173 V. 390-407 hue. There the spring is perpetual. In this grove, while
Proserpina is amusing herself, and is plucking either violets or white
lilies, and while, with childlike eagerness, she is filling her baskets
and her bosom, and is striving to outdo her companions of the
same age in gathering, almost at the same instant she is beheld,
beloved, and seized by Pluto; 47 in such great haste is love. The
Goddess, affrighted, with lamenting lips calls both her mother and her companions, 48 but more frequently her mother; 49 and as she has torn
her garment from the upper edge, the collected flowers fall from her
loosened robes. So great, too, is the innocence of her 195 V. 400-414 childish years, this loss excites the maiden’s grief as well. The
ravisher drives on his chariot, and encourages his horses, called, each
by his name, along whose necks and manes he shakes the reins, dyed with
swarthy rust. He is borne through deep lakes, and the pools of the
Palici, 50 smelling strong of sulphur, and boiling fresh
from out of the burst earth; and where the Bacchiadæ, 51 174 V. 407-432 a race sprung from Corinth, with its two seas, 52 built a city 53 between unequal harbors. “There is a stream in the middle, between Cyane and the Pisæan
Arethusa, which is confined within itself, being enclosed by mountain
ridges at a short distance from each other . Here was Cyane, 54 the most celebrated among the Sicilian Nymphs, from whose name the pool
also was called, who stood up from out of the midst of the water, as far
as the higher part of her stomach, and recognized the God, and said, ‘No
further 196 V. 415-444 shall you go. Thou mayst not be the son-in-law of Ceres against her
will. The girl should have been asked of her mother , not
carried away. But if I may be allowed to compare little matters with
great ones, Anapis 55 also loved me. Yet I married him, courted, and not
frightened into it , like her.’ She thus said, and
stretching her arms on different sides, she stood in his way. The son of
Saturn no longer restrained his rage; and encouraging his terrible
steeds, he threw his royal sceptre, hurled with a strong arm, into the
lowest depths of the stream. The earth, thus struck, made a way
down to Tartarus, and received the descending chariot in the middle of
the yawning space. But Cyane, lamenting both the ravished Goddess, and
the slighted privileges of her spring, carries in her silent mind an
inconsolable wound, and is entirely dissolved into tears, and melts away
into those waters, of which she had been but lately the great guardian
Divinity. You might see her limbs soften, her bones become subjected to
bending, her nails lay aside their hardness: each, too, of the smaller
extremities of the whole of her body melts away; both her azure hair,
her fingers, her 175 V. 432-460 legs, and her feet; for easy is the change of those small members into a
cold stream. After that, her back, her shoulders, her side, and her
breast dissolve, vanishing into thin rivulets. Lastly, pure water,
instead of live blood, enters her corrupted veins, and nothing remains
which you can grasp in your hand . “In the mean time, throughout all lands and in every sea, the
daughter is sought in vain by her anxious mother. Aurora, coming with
her ruddy locks does not behold her taking any rest, neither does
Hesperus. She, with her two hands, sets light to some pines at the
flaming Ætna, and giving herself no rest, bears them through the frosty
darkness. Again, when the genial day has dulled the light of the stars,
she 197 V. 444-461 seeks her daughter from the rising of the sun to the setting thereof.
Fatigued by the labor, she has now contracted thirst, and no
streams have washed her mouth, when by chance she beholds a cottage
covered with thatch, and knocks at its humble door, upon which an old
woman 56 comes out and sees the Goddess, and gives her, asking
for water, a sweet drink which she has lately distilled 57 from
parched pearled barley. While she is drinking it thus presented,
a boy 58 of impudent countenance and bold, stands before the
Goddess, and laughs, and calls her greedy. She is offended; and a part
being not yet quaffed, the Goddess sprinkles him, as he is thus talking, with the barley mixed with the liquor. “His face contracts the stains, and he bears legs where just now he
was bearing arms; a tail is added to his changed limbs; and he is
contracted into a diminutive form, that no great power of doing injury
may exist; his size is less than that of a small lizard. He flies
from the old woman, astounded and weeping, and trying to touch the
monstrosity; and 176 V. 460-461 he seeks a lurking place, and has a name suited to his color, having his
body speckled with various spots.” EXPLANATION. The story of the rape of Proserpine has caused much inquiry among
writers, both ancient and modern, as to the facts on which it was
founded. Some have grounded it on principles of natural philosophy;
while others have supposed it to contain some portion of ancient
history, defaced and blemished in lapse of time. The antiquarian Pezeron is of opinion, that in the partition of 198 the world among the Titan kings, Pluto had the west for his share; and
that he carried a colony to the further end of Spain, where he caused
the gold and silver mines of that region to be worked. The situation of
his kingdom, which lay very low, comparatively with Greece, and which
the ancients believed to be covered with eternal darkness, gave rise to
the fable, that Pluto had got Hell for his share; and this notion was
much encouraged by the subterranean nature of the mines which he caused
to be worked. He thinks that the river Tartarus, so famed in the realms
of Pluto, was no other than the Tartessa, or Guadalquivir of the present
day, which runs through the centre of Spain. Lethe, too, he thinks to
have been the Guadalaviar, in the same country. Pluto, he suggests, had
heard of the beauty of Proserpine, the daughter of Ceres, queen of
Sicily, and carried her thence, which gave rise to the tradition that
she had been carried to the Infernal Regions. Le Clerc, on the other hand, thinks that it was not Pluto that carried
away Proserpine, but Aidoneus, king of Epirus, or Orcus king of the
Molossians. Aidoneus is supposed to have wrought mines in his kingdom,
and, as the entrance into it was over a river called Acheron, that
prince has often been confounded with Pluto; Epirus too, which was
situate very low, may have been figuratively described as the Infernal
Regions; for which reason, the journeys of Theseus and Hercules into
Epirus may have been spoken of as descents into the Stygian abodes.
Le Clerc supposes that Ceres was reigning in Sicily at the time
when Aidoneus was king of Epirus, and that she took great care to
instruct her subjects in the art of tilling the ground and sowing corn,
and established laws for regulating civil government and the
preservation of private property; for which reasons she was afterward
deemed to be the Goddess of the Earth, and of Corn. Cicero and Diodorus
Siculus tell us that Ceres made her residence at Enna, or Henna, in
Sicily, which name, according to Bochart, signifies ‘agreeable
fountain.’ Cicero and Strabo agree with Ovid in telling us that
Proserpine, the only daughter of Ceres, whom other writers name
Pherephata, was walking in the adjacent meadows, and gathering flowers
with her companions; upon which, certain pirates seized her, and,
placing her in a chariot, carried her to the seaside, whence they
embarked for Epirus. As Pausanias tells us, it was immediately spread
abroad, that Aidoneus, or Pluto, as he was called, had done it, the act
having been really committed by others, according to his orders. As
those who carried her off concealed themselves in the caverns of Mount
Ætna, awaiting their opportunity to escape, it was afterwards fabled
that Pluto came out of the Infernal Regions at that 177 place; as that mountain, from its nature, was always deemed one of the
outlets of Hell. Upon this, Ceres went to Greece, in search of her
daughter; and, resting at Eleusis, in Attica, she heard that the ship in
which her daughter was carried away had sailed westward. On this, she
complained to Jupiter, one of the Titan kings, but could obtain no
further satisfaction than that her daughter should be permitted to visit
her occasionally, whereby, at length, her grief was mitigated. Banier does not agree with these suggestions of Pezeron and
Le Clerc, and thinks that Ceres is no other personage than the Isis
of the Egyptians, supposing that the story is founded on the following 199 V. 462-463 circumstance:— Greece , he says, was afflicted with famine in the
reign of Erectheus, who was obliged to send to Egypt for corn, when
those who went for it brought back the worship of the Deity who presided
over agriculture. The evils which the Athenians had suffered by the
famine, and the dread of again incurring the same calamity, made them
willingly embrace the rites of a Goddess whom they believed able to
protect them from it. Triptolemus established her worship in Eleusis,
and there instituted the mysteries which he had brought over from Egypt.
These had been previously introduced into Sicily, which was the reason
why it was said that Ceres came from Sicily to Athens. Her daughter was
said to have been taken away, because corn and fruit had not been
produced in sufficient quantities, for some time, to furnish food for
the people. Pluto was said to have carried her to the Infernal regions,
because the grain and seeds at that time remained buried, as it were, at
the very center of the earth. Jupiter was said to have decided the
difference between Ceres and Pluto, because the earth again became
covered with crops. This appears to be an ingenious allegorical explanation of the story;
but it is not at all improbable that it may have been founded upon
actual facts, and that, having lost her daughter, and going to Attica to
seek her, Ceres taught Triptolemus the mysteries of Isis; and that, in
process of time, Ceres, having become enrolled among the Divinities of
Greece, her worship became confounded with that of Isis. It is very possible that the story of the transformation of Stellio into
a newt may have had no other foundation than the Poet’s fancy. FABLE V. Ceres proceeds in a fruitless search for her
daughter over the whole earth, until the Nymph Arethusa acquaints her
with the place of her ravisher’s abode. The Goddess makes her complaint
to Jupiter, and obtains his consent for her daughter’s return to the
upper world, provided she has not eaten anything since her arrival in
Pluto’s dominions. Ascalaphus, however, having informed that she has
eaten some seeds of a pomegranate, Ceres is disappointed, and
Proserpine, in her wrath, metamorphoses the informer into an owl. The
Sirens have wings given them by the Gods, to enable them to be more
expeditious in seeking for Proserpine. 178 V. 462-479 Jupiter, to console Ceres for her loss, decides that her daughter shall
remain six months each year with her mother upon earth, and the other
six with her husband, in the Infernal Regions. “ It were a tedious task 59 to
relate through what lands and what seas the Goddess wandered; for her
search the world was too limited. She returns to 200 V. 464-483 Sicily; and while, in her passage, she views all places , she
comes, too, to Cyane; she, had she not been transformed, would have told
her everything. But both mouth and tongue were wanting to her, thus desirous to tell, and she had no means whereby to speak.
Still, she gave unmistakable tokens, and pointed out, on the top of the
water, the girdle 60 of Proserpine, well known to her parent, which by
chance had fallen off in that place into the sacred stream. “Soon as she recognized this, as if then, at last, she fully
understood that her daughter had been carried away 61 the Goddess tore
her unadorned hair, and struck her breast again and again with her
hands. Not as yet does she know where she is, yet she exclaims against
all countries, and calls them ungrateful, and not worthy of the gifts of
corn; and Trinacria before all others, in which she has
found the proofs of her loss. Wherefore, with vengeful hand, she there
broke the ploughs that were turning up the clods, and, in her anger,
consigned to a similar death both the husbandmen and the oxen that
cultivated the 179 V. 479-508 fields, and ordered the land to deny a return of what had been deposited therein , and rendered the seed corrupted. The fertility of the
soil, famed over the wide world, lies in ruin, the corn dies in the
early blade, and sometimes excessive heat of the 201 V. 483-508 sun, sometimes excessive showers, spoil it. Both the Constellations and
the winds injure it, and the greedy birds pick up the seed as it is
sown; darnel, and thistles, and unconquerable weeds, choke the crops of
wheat. “Then the Alpheian Nymph 62 raised her head from out of the
Elean waters, and drew back her dripping hair from her forehead to her
ears, and said, “O thou mother of the virgin sought over the whole
world, and of the crops as well , cease at length thy
boundless toil, and in thy wrath be not angered with a region that is
faithful to thee. This land does not deserve it; and against its will it
gave a path for the commission of the outrage. Nor am I now a suppliant for my own country; a stranger I am
come hither. Pisa is my native place, and from Elis do I derive my
birth. As a stranger do I inhabit Sicily, but this land is more pleasing
to me than any other soil. I, Arethusa, now have this for my abode,
this for my habitation; which, do thou, most kindly Goddess ,
preserve. Why I have been removed from my native place, and have
been carried to Ortygia, through the waters of seas so spacious,
a seasonable time will come for my telling thee, when thou shalt be
eased of thy cares, and wilt be of more cheerful aspect. The
pervious earth affords me a passage, and, carried beneath its lowest
caverns, here I lift my head again , and behold the stars which I
have not been used to see . While, then, I was running under
the earth, along the Stygian stream, thy Proserpine was there beheld by
my eyes. 63 She indeed was sad, and not as yet
without alarm in her countenance, but still she is a queen, and
the most ennobled female in the world of darkness; still, too, is
she the powerful spouse of the Infernal King.” 180 V. 509-538 202 V. 509-534 “The mother, on hearing these words, stood amazed, as though she had been made of stone, and for a long time was like one
stupefied; and when her intense bewilderment was dispelled by the weight
of her grief, she departed in her chariot into the ætherial air, and
there, with her countenance all clouded, she stood before Jupiter, much
to his discredit, with her hair dishevelled; and she said, “I have come,
Jupiter, as a suppliant to thee, both for my own offspring and for
thine. If thou hast no respect for the mother, still let the
daughter move her father; and I pray thee not to have the less regard
for her, because she was brought forth by my travail. Lo! my daughter,
so long sought for, has been found by me at last; if you call it
finding 64 to be more certain of one’s loss; or if you call it
finding, to know where she is. I will endure the fact , that
she has been carried off, if he will only restore her. For, indeed,
a daughter of thine is not deserving of a ravisher for a husband,
if now my own daughter is.” Jupiter replied, “Thy daughter is a pledge
and charge, in common to me and thee; but, should it please thee only to
give right names to things, this deed is not an injury, but it is a mark
of affection, nor will he, as a son-in-law, be any disgrace to
us, if thou only, Goddess, shouldst give thy consent. Although other recommendations were wanting, how great a thing is it to be the
brother of Jupiter! and besides, is it not because other points are not
wanting, and because he is not my inferior, except by the accident of
his allotment of the Stygian abodes ? But if thy eagerness is so
great for their separation, let Proserpine return to heaven; still upon
this fixed condition, if she has touched no food there with her lips;
for thus has it been provided by the law of the Destinies.” “ Thus he spoke; still Ceres is now resolved to fetch
away her daughter; but not so do the Fates permit. For the damsel had
broke her fast; and, while in her 203 V. 535-551 innocence she was walking about the finely-cultivated garden, she had
plucked a pomegranate 65 from the bending tree, and had chewed in her 181 V. 538-557 mouth seven grains 66 taken from the pale rind. Ascalaphus 67 alone,
of all persons, had seen this, whom Orphne, by no means the most obscure
among the Nymphs of Avernus, 68 is said once to have borne to her
own Acheron within his dusky caves. He beheld this , and
cruelly prevented her return by his discovery. The Queen of Erebus
grieved, and changed the informer into an accursed bird, and turned his
head, sprinkled with the waters of Phlegethon, 69 into a beak, and
feathers, and great eyes. He, thus robbed of his own shape , is clothed with tawny wings, his head becomes larger, his
long nails bend inwards, and with difficulty can he move the wings that
spring through his sluggish arms. He becomes an obscene bird, the
foreboder of approaching woe, a lazy owl, a direful omen to
mortals. “But he, by his discovery, and his talkativeness, may seem to have
merited punishment. Whence have 204 V. 552-563 you, daughters of Acheloüs, 70 feathers and the feet of birds,
since you have the faces of maidens? Is it because, when Proserpine was
gathering the flowers of spring, you were mingled in the number of her
companions? After you had sought her in vain throughout the whole world,
immediately, that the waters might be 182 V. 557-563 sensible of your concern, you wished to be able, on the support of your
wings, to hover over the waves, and you found the Gods propitious, and
saw your limbs grow yellow with feathers suddenly formed. But lest the
sweetness of your voice, formed for charming the ear, and so great
endowments of speech, should lose the gift of a tongue, your virgin
countenance and your human voice still remained.” EXPLANATION. Apollodorus says, that the terms of the treaty respecting Proserpine
were, that she should stay on earth nine months with Ceres, and three
with Pluto, in the Infernal Regions. Other writers divide the time
equally; six months to Ceres, and six to Pluto. They also tell us that
the story of Ascalaphus is founded on the fact, that he was one of the
courtiers of Pluto, who, having advised his master to carry away
Proserpine, did all that lay in his power to obstruct the endeavors of
Ceres, and hinder the restoration of her daughter, on which Proserpine
had him privately destroyed; to screen which deed the Fable was
invented; the pernicious counsels which he gave his master being
signified by the seeds of the pomegranate. It has also been suggested
that the story of his change into an owl was based on the circumstance
that he was the overseer of the mines of Pluto, in which he perished,
removed from the light of day. Perhaps he was there crushed to death by
the fall of a rock, which caused the poets to say that Proserpine had
covered him with a large stone, as Apollodorus informs us, who also says
that it was Ceres who inflicted the punishment upon him. The name
‘Ascalaphus’ signifies, ‘one that breaks stones,’ and, very probably,
that name was only given him to denote his employment. Some writers
state that he was changed into a lizard, which the Greeks call
‘Ascalabos,’ and, probably, the resemblance between the names gave rise
to this version of the story. Probably, the story of the Nymph Cyane reproaching Pluto with his
treatment of Proserpine, and being thereupon changed by him into a
fountain, has no other foundation than the propinquity of the place
where Pluto’s emissaries embarked to a stream of that 205 V. 564-580 name near the city of Syracuse; which was, perhaps, overflowing at that
time, and may have impeded their passage. Ovid, probably, feigned that the Sirens begged the Gods to change them
into birds, that they might seek for Proserpine, on the ground of some
existing tradition, that living on the coast of Italy, near the island
of Sicily, and having heard of the misfortune that had befallen her,
they ordered a ship with sails to be equipped to go in search of her.
Further reference to the Sirens will be made, on treating of the
adventures of Ulysses. 183 V. 564-588 FABLE VI. The Muse continues her song, in which
Ceres, being satisfied with the decision of Jupiter relative to her
daughter, returns to Arethusa, to learn the history of her adventures.
The Nymph entertains the Goddess with the Story of the passion of
Alpheus, and his pursuit of her; to avoid which, she implores the
assistance of Diana, who changes her into a fountain. “ But Jupiter being the mediator
between his brother and his disconsolate sister, divides the rolling
year equally between them . For now , the Goddess,
a common Divinity of two kingdoms, is so many months with her
mother, and just as many with her husband. Immediately the appearance of
both her mind and her countenance is changed; for the brow of the
Goddess, which, of late, might appear sad, even to Pluto, himself, is
full of gladness; as the Sun, which has lately been covered with watery
clouds, when he comes forth from the clouds, now dispersed. The
genial Ceres, now at ease on the recovery of her daughter, thus asks, ‘What was the cause of thy wanderings? Why art thou,
Arethusa, a sacred spring ?’ The waters are silent, and , the
Goddess raises her head from the deep fountain; and, having dried her
green tresses with her hand, she relates the old amours of the stream of
Elis. 71 “‘I was,’ says she, ‘one of the Nymphs which exist in Achaia, nor did
any one more eagerly skim along the glades than myself, nor with more
industry set the 206 V. 581-606 nets. But though the reputation for beauty was never sought by me,
although, too , I was of robust make, still I had the
name of being beautiful. But my appearance, when so much commended, did
not please me; and I, like a country lass, blushed at those endowments
of person in which other females are wont to take a pride, and I deemed
it a crime to please. I remember, I was returning weary from
the Stymphalian 72 wood; the weather was hot, and my toil had redoubled
the intense heat. I found a stream gliding on without any eddies,
without any noise, and 184 V. 588-615 clear to the bottom; through which every pebble, at so great a depth,
might be counted, and which you could hardly suppose to be in
motion. The hoary willows 73 and poplars, nourished by the water,
furnished a shade, spontaneously produced, along the shelving banks.
I approached, and, at first, I dipped the soles of my feet,
and then, as far as the knee. Not content with that, I undressed,
and I laid my soft garments upon a bending willow; and, naked,
I plunged into the waters. “‘While I was striking them, and drawing them towards me ,
moving in a thousand ways, and was sending forth my extended arms,
I perceived a most unusual murmuring noise beneath the middle of
the stream; and, alarmed, I stood on the edge of the nearer bank.
‘Whither dost thou hasten, Arethusa?’ said Alpheus from his waves.
‘Whither dost thou hasten?’ again he said to me, in a hollow tone. Just
as I was, I fled without my clothes; for the other side had
my garments. So much the more swiftly did he pursue, and become
inflamed; and, because I was naked, the more tempting to him did I
appear. Thus was I running; thus unrelentingly was he pursuing me; as
the doves are wont to fly from the hawk with trembling wings, and as the
hawk is wont to pursue the trembling doves, I held out in my course
even as far as Orchomenus, 74 207 V. 607-634 and Psophis, 75 and Cyllene, and the Mænalian valleys, and cold Erymanthus and Elis. Nor was he swifter than I, but
unequal to him in strength, I was unable, any longer, to
keep up the chase; for he was able to endure prolonged fatigue. However,
I ran over fields and over mountains covered with trees,
rocks too, and crags, and where there was no path. The sun was upon my
back; I saw a long shadow advancing before my feet, unless,
perhaps, it was my fear that 185 V. 615-641 saw it. But, at all events, I was alarmed at the sound of his feet,
and his increased hardness of breathing was now fanning the
fillets of my hair. Wearied with the exertion of my flight, I said,
‘Give aid, Dictynna, to thy armor-bearer, or I am overtaken; I , to whom thou hast so often given thy bow to carry, and thy
darts enclosed in a quiver .’ The Goddess was moved, and, taking one of the
dense clouds, she threw it over me. The river looked about for me,
concealed in the darkness, and, in his ignorance sought about the
encircling cloud and twice, unconsciously did he go around the place
where the Goddess had concealed me, and twice did he cry, ‘Ho,
Arethusa! 76 Ho, Arethusa! ’ What, then, were my feelings
in my wretchedness? Were they not just those of the lamb, as it hears
the wolves howling around the high sheep-folds? Or of the hare, which,
lurking in the bush, beholds the hostile noses of the dogs, and dares
not make a single movement with her body? Yet he does not depart; for no further does he trace any prints of my feet. He watches the cloud
and the spot. A cold perspiration takes possession of my limbs thus besieged, and azure colored drops distil from all my body.
Wherever I move my foot, there 208 V. 634-641 flows a lake; drops trickle from my hair, and, in less time than I take
in acquainting thee with my fate, I was changed into a stream. But
still the river recognized the waters, the objects of his love; and,
having laid aside the shape of a mortal, which he had assumed, he was
changed into his own waters, that he might mingle with me. Thereupon , the Delian Goddess cleaved the ground. Sinking,
I was carried through dark caverns to Ortygia, 77 which, being dear
to me, from the surname of my own Goddess, was the first to introduce me
to the upper air.’” EXPLANATION. Bochart tells us that the story of the fountain Arethusa and the river
Alpheus, her lover, who traversed so many countries in pursuit of her,
has no other foundation than an equivocal expression in the language of
the first inhabitants of Sicily. The Phœnicians, who went to settle in 186 V. 642-651 that island, finding the fountain surrounded with willows, gave it the
name of ‘Alphaga,’ or ‘the fountain of the willows.’ Others, again, gave
it the name of ‘Arith,’ signifying ‘a stream.’ The Greeks, arriving
there in after ages, not understanding the signification of these words,
and remembering their own river Alpheus, in Elis, imagined that since
the river and the fountain had nearly the same name, Alpheus had crossed
the sea, to arrive in Sicily. This notion appearing, probably, to the poets not devoid of ingenuity,
they accordingly founded on it the romantic story of the passion of the
river God Alpheus for the Nymph Arethusa. Some of the ancient historians
appear, however, in their credulity, really to have believed, at least,
a part of the story, as they seriously tell us, that the river
Alpheus passes under the bed of the sea, and rises again in Sicily, near
the fountain of Arethusa. Even among the more learned, this fable gained
credit; for we find the oracle of Delphi ordering Archias to conduct a colony of
Corinthians to Syracuse, and the priestess giving the following
directions:—‘Go into that island where the river Alpheus mixes his
waters with the fair Arethusa.’ Pausanias avows, that he regards the story of Alpheus and Arethusa as a
mere fable; but, not daring to dispute a fact established by
the response of an oracle, he does not contradict the fact of the river
running through the sea, though he is at a loss to understand how it can
happen. 209 V. 642-661 FABLE VII. Ceres entrusts her chariot to
Triptolemus, and orders him to go everywhere, and cultivate the earth.
He obeys her, and, at length, arrives in Scythia, where Lyncus,
designing to kill him, is changed into a lynx. The Muse then finishes
her song, on which the daughters of Pierus are changed into magpies. “ Thus far Arethusa. The fertile
Goddess yoked 78 two dragons to her chariot, and curbed their mouths
with bridles; and was borne through the mid air of heaven and of earth,
and guided her light chariot to the Tritonian citadel, to Triptolemus;
and she ordered him to scatter the seeds that were entrusted to him partly in the fallow ground, and partly in the ground restored to cultivation after so long a time. Now had the youth been
borne on high over Europe and the lands of Asia, 79 and he arrived at the
coast of Scythia: Lyncus was the king there. He entered the house of the
king. Being asked whence he came, 187 V. 651-678 and the occasion of his coming, and his name, and his country, he said,
‘My country is the famous Athens, my name is Triptolemus. I came
neither in a ship through the waves, nor on foot by land; the pervious
sky made a way for me. I bring the gifts of Ceres, which, scattered
over the wide fields, are to yield you the fruitful harvests, and
wholesome food.’ The barbarian envies him; and that he himself may be deemed the author of so great a benefit, he receives him with
hospitality, and, when overpowered with sleep, he attacks him with the
sword. But , while attempting to pierce his breast, Ceres made him
a lynx; and again sent the Mopsopian 80 youth to drive the sacred drawers
of her chariot through the air. 210 V. 662-678 “The greatest of us 81 had now finished her learned song. But the
Nymphs, with unanimous voice, pronounced that the Goddesses who inhabit
Helicon had proved the conquerors. Then the others, thus vanquished, began to scatter their abuse: ‘Since,’ said she, ‘it is a
trifling matter for you to have merited punishment by this contest, you
add abuse, too, to your fault, and endurance is not permitted us: we
shall proceed to punishment, and whither our resentment calls, we shall
follow.’ The Emathian sisters smiled, and despised our threatening
language; and endeavoring to speak, and to menace with their insolent
hands amid great clamor, they beheld quills growing out of their nails,
and their arms covered with feathers. And they each see the face of the
other shooting out into a hard beak, and new birds being added to the
woods. And while they strive to beat their breasts elevated by the
motion of their arms, they hang poised in the air, as magpies,
the scandal of the groves. Even then their original talkativeness
remains in them as birds, and their jarring garrulity, and their
enormous love of chattering.” EXPLANATION. Triptolemus reigned at Eleusis at the time when the mysteries of Ceres
were established there. As we are told by Philochorus, he went with a
ship, to carry corn into different countries, and introduced there the
worship of Ceres, whose priest he was. This is, doubtless, the key for
the 188 explanation of the story, that Ceres nursed him on her own milk, and
purified him by fire. Some have supposed that the fable refers to the
epoch when agriculture was introduced into Greece: but it is much more
probable that it relates simply to the introduction there of the
mysterious worship of Ceres, which was probably imported from Egypt. It
is possible that, at the same period, the Greeks may have learned some
improved method of tilling the ground, acquired by their intercourse
with Egypt. Probably, the dangers which Triptolemus experienced in his voyages and
travels, gave rise to the story of Lyncus, whose cruelty caused him to
be changed into a lynx. Bochart and Le Clerc think that the fable
of Triptolemus being drawn by winged dragons, is based upon the
equivocal meaning of a Phœnician word, which signified either ‘a winged
dragon,’ or ‘a ship fastened 211 with iron nails or bolts.’ Philochorus, however, as cited by Eusebius, says
that his ship was called a flying dragon, from its carrying the figure
of a dragon on its prow. We learn from a fragment of Stobæus, that
Erectheus, when engaged in a war against the Eleusinians, was told by
the oracle that he would be victorious, if he sacrificed his daughter
Proserpine. This, perhaps, may have given rise, or added somewhat, to
the story of the rape of Proserpine by Pluto. According to a fragment of Homer, cited by Pausanias, the names of the
first Greeks, who were initiated into the mysteries of Ceres,
were,—Celeus, Triptolemus, Eumolpus, and Diocles. Clement of
Alexandria calls them Baubon, Dysaulus, Eubuleüs, Eumolpus, and
Triptolemus. Eumolpus being the Hierophant, or explainer of the
mysteries of Eleusis , made war against Erectheus, king of Athens.
They were both killed in battle, and it was thereupon agreed that the
posterity of Erectheus should be kings of Athens, and the descendants of
Eumolpus should, in future, retain the office of Hierophant. 1. Phineus. ]—Ver. 8. He was the brother of Cepheus, to whom
Andromeda had been betrothed. There was another person of the same name,
who entertained the Argonauts, and who is also mentioned in the
Metamorphoses. 2. In the cushion. ]—Ver. 34. This was probably the mattress or
covering of the couch on which the ancients reclined during meals. It
was frequently stuffed with wool; but among the poorer classes, with
straw and dried weeds. 3. An altar. ]—Ver. 36. This was either the altar devoted to
the worship of the Penates; or, more probably, perhaps, in this
instance, that erected for sacrifice to the Gods on the occasion of the
nuptials of Perseus and Andromeda. 4. Gods of hospitality. ]—Ver. 45. Jupiter was especially
considered to be the avenger of a violation of the laws of
hospitality. 5. Athis by name. ]—Ver. 47. Athis, or Atys, is here described
as of Indian birth, to distinguish him from the Phrygian youth of the
same name, beloved by Cybele, whose story is told by Ovid in the
Fasti. 6. His falchion. ]—Ver. 69. The “Harpe” was a short, crooked
sword, or falchion: such as we call a “scimitar.” 7. Syene. ]—Ver. 74. This was a city on the confines of
Æthiopia, bordering upon Egypt. Ovid tells us in the Pontic Epistles
(Book i. Ep. 5, l. 79 A ), that “there, at the time of the
summer solstice, bodies as they stand, have no shadow.” 8. A huge bowl. ]—Ver. 82. Clarke calls “ingentem cratera” “a swingeing bowl.” 9. Sperchius. ]—Ver. 86. This was probably a person, and not
the river of Thessaly, flowing into the Malian Gulf. 10. Has declined the warfare. ]—Ver. 91. This is an illustration
of the danger of neutrality, when the necessity of the times requires a
man to adopt the side which he deems to be in the right. 11. Clings to the altars. ]—Ver. 103. In cases of extreme
danger, it was usual to fly to the temples of the Deities, and to take
refuge behind the altar or statue of the God, and even to cling to it,
if necessity required. 12. A mournful dirge. ]—Ver. 118. Clarke translates ‘Casuque
canit miserabile carmen;’ ‘and in his fall plays but a dismal
ditty.’ 13. Cinyphian. ]—Ver. 124. Cinyps, or Cinyphus, was the name of
a river situate in the north of Africa. 14. Nasamonian land. ]—Ver. 129. The Nasamones were a people of
Libya, near the Syrtes, or quicksands, who subsisted by plundering the
numerous wrecks on their coasts. 15. Bactrian. ]—Ver. 135. Bactris was the chief city of Bactria,
a region bordering on the western confines of India. 16. The Mendesian. ]—Ver. 144. Mendes was a city of Egypt, near
the mouth of the Nile, where Pan was worshipped, according to Pliny.
Celadon was a native of either this place, or of the city of Myndes, in
Syria. 17. Now
deceived. ]—Ver. 147. Because he had not foreseen his own
approaching fate. 18. Bellona. ]—Ver. 155. She was the sister of Mars, and was the
Goddess of War. 19. Chaonian. ]—Ver. 163. Chaonia was a mountainous part of
Epirus, so called from Chaon, who was accidentally killed, while
hunting, by Helenus, the son of Priam. It has been, however, suggested
that the reading ought to be ‘Choanius;’ as the Choanii were a people
bordering on Arabia; and very justly, for how should the Chaonians and
Nabathæans, or Epirotes, and Arabians become united in the same
sentence, as meeting in a region so distant as Æthiopia? 20. Cyllenian. ]—Ver. 176. His falchion had been given to him by
Mercury, who was born on Mount Cyllene, in Arcadia. 21. Eryx rebuked them. ]—Ver. 195. ‘Increpat hos Eryx’ is
translated by Clarke, ‘Eryx rattles these blades.’ 22. Prœtus. ]—Ver. 238. He was the brother of Acrisius, the
grandfather of Perseus. 23. Polydectes. ]—Ver. 242. Polydectes was king of the little
island of Seriphus, one of the Cyclades. His brother Dictys had removed
Perseus, with his mother Danaë, to the kingdom of Polydectes. The latter
became smitten with love for Danaë, though he was about to marry
Hippodamia. On this occasion he exacted a promise from Perseus, of the
head of the Gorgon Medusa. When Perseus returned victorious, he found
that his mother, with her protector Dictys, had taken refuge at the
altars of the Deities, against the violence of Polydectes; on which
Perseus changed him into stone. The story of Perseus afforded abundant
materials to the ancient poets. Æschylus wrote a Tragedy called
Polydectes, Sophocles one called Danaë, while Euripides composed two,
called respectively Danaë and Dictys. Pherecydes also wrote on this
subject, and his work seems to have been a text book for succeeding
poets. Polygnotus painted the return of Perseus with the head of Medusa,
to the island of Seriphus. 24. To her brother. ]—Ver. 250. As both Tritonia, or Minerva,
and Perseus had Jupiter for their father. 25. Gyarus. ]—Ver. 252. Cythnus and Gyarus were two islands of
the Cyclades. 26. The new fountain. ]—Ver. 256. This was Helicon, which was
produced by a blow from the hoof of Pegasus. 27. Urania. ]—Ver. 260. One of the Muses, who presided over
Astronomy. 28. Mnemonian. ]—Ver. 268. The Muses are called ‘Mnemonides,’
from the Greek word μνήμων ‘remembering,’ or ‘mindful,’ because they were said to be the daughters,
by Jupiter, of Mnemosyne, or Memory. 29. Phocean. ]—Ver. 276. Daulis was a city of Phocis;
a district between Bœotia and Ætolia, in which the city of Delphi
and Mount Parnassus were situate. 30. Our Divinities. ]—Ver. 279. ‘Nostra veneratus numina,’ is
translated by Clarke, ‘and worshipping our Goddessships.’ 31. Some saluting them. ]—Ver. 295. That is, crying out χαῖρε, χαῖρε , the usual salutation among the
Greeks, equivalent to our ‘How d’ye do?’ From two lines of Persius, it
seems to have been a common thing to teach parrots and magpies to repeat
these words. 32. Lands of Pella. ]—Ver. 302 . Pella was a city of Macedonia, in that
part of it which was called Emathia. It was famed for being the
birthplace of Philip, and Alexander the Great. 33. Pæonian. ]—Ver. 303. Pæonia was a mountainous region of
Macedonia, adjacent to Emathia. 34. Evippe. ]—Ver. 303. Evippe was the wife of Pierus, and the
mother of the Pierides. 35. Achaia. ]—Ver. 306. The Achaia here mentioned was the
Hæmonian, or Thessalian Achaia. The other parts of Thessaly were
Phthiotis and Pelasgiotis. 36. Aganippe. ]—Ver. 312. Aganippe was the name of a fountain in
Bœotia, near Helicon, sacred to the Muses. It is called Hyantean, from
the ancient name of the inhabitants of the country. 37. Venus as a fish. ]—Ver. 331. The story of the transformation
of Venus into a fish, to escape the fury of the Giants, is told, at
length, in the second Book of the Fasti. 38. Wings of an Ibis. ]—Ver. 331. The Ibis was a bird of Egypt,
much resembling a crane, or stork. It was said to be of peculiarly
unclean habits, and to subsist upon serpents. 39. We of Aonia. ]—Ver. 333. The Muses obtained the name of
Aonides from Aonia, a mountainous district of Bœotia. 40. Trinacria. ]—Ver. 347. Sicily was called Trinacris, or
Trinacria, from its three corners or promontories, which are here named
by the Poet. 41. Pelorus. ]—Ver. 350. This cape, or promontory, now called
Capo di Faro, is on the east of Sicily, looking towards Italy, whence
its present epithet, ‘Ausonian.’ It was so named from Pelorus, the pilot
of Hannibal, who, suspecting him of treachery, had put him to death, and
buried him on that spot. 42. Pachynus. ]—Ver. 351. This Cape, now Capo Passaro, looks
towards Greece, from the south of Sicily. 43. Lilybæum. ]—Ver. 351. Now called Capo Marsala. It is on the
west of Sicily, looking towards the African coast. 44. Erycina. ]—Ver. 363. Venus is so called from Eryx, the
mountain of Sicily, on which her son Eryx, one of the early Sicilian
kings, erected a magnificent temple in her honor. 45. The triple kingdom. ]—Ver. 368. In the partition of the
dominion of the universe the heavens fell to the lot of Jupiter, the
seas to that of Neptune; while the infernal regions, or, as some say,
the earth, were awarded to Pluto. 46. Henna. ]—Ver. 385. Henna, or Enna, was a city so exactly
situated in the middle of Sicily that it was called the navel of that
island. The worship of Ceres there was so highly esteemed, that ancient
writers remarked, that you might easily take the whole place for one
vast temple of that Goddess, and all the inhabitants for her priests.
Proserpine is said by many authors, besides Ovid, to have been carried
away by Pluto in the vicinity of Henna; though some writers say that it
took place in Attica, and others again in Asia, while the Hymn of
Orpheus mentions the western coast of Spain. Cicero describes this spot
in his Oration against Verres: his words are, ‘It is said that Libera,
who is the Deity that we call Proserpine, was carried away from the
Grove of Enna. Enna, where these events took place to which I now refer,
is in a lofty and exposed situation; but on the summit the ground
presents a level surface, and there are springs of everflowing water.
The spot is entirely cut off and separated from all [ordinary] means of
approach. Around it are many lakes and groves, and flowers in bloom at
all seasons of the year; so that the very spot seems to portray the rape
of the damsel, with which story, from our very infancy, we have been
familiar. Close by, there is a cavern with its face towards the north,
of an immense depth, from which they say that father Pluto, in his
chariot, suddenly emerged, and carrying off the maiden, bore her away
from that spot, and then, not far from Syracuse, descended into the
earth, from which place a lake suddenly arose; where, at the present
day, the inhabitants of Syracuse celebrate a yearly festival.’ 47. Seized by Pluto. ]—Ver. 395. Pluto is here called ‘Dis.’
This name was given to him as the God of the Earth, from the bowels of
which riches are dug up. 48. Her companions. ]—Ver. 397. Pausanias, in his Messeniaca,
has preserved the names of the companions of Ceres, having copied them
from the works of Homer. 49. Her mother. ]—Ver. 397. Homer, in his poem on the subject,
represents that Ceres heard the cries of her daughter, when calling upon
her mother for assistance. Ovid recounts this tale much more at length
in the fourth Book of the Fasti. 50. The Palici . ]—Ver. 406. The Palici were two
brothers, sons of Jupiter and the Nymph Thalea, and, according to some,
received their name from the Greek words πάλιν ἱκέσθαι , ‘to come again [to life].’ Their
mother, when pregnant, prayed the earth to open, and to hide her from
the vengeful wrath of Juno. This was done; and when they had arrived at
maturity, the Palici burst from the ground in the island of Sicily. They
were Deities much venerated there, but their worship did not extend to
any other countries. We learn from Macrobius that the natives of Sicily
pointed out two small lakes, from which the brothers were said to have
emerged, and that the veneration attached to them was such, that by
their means they decided disputes, as they imagined that perjurers would
meet their death in these waters, while the guiltless would be able to
come forth from them unharmed. They were fetid, sulphureous pools of
water, probably affected by the volcanic action of Mount Ætna. 51. The Bacchiadæ. ]—Ver. 407. Archias, one of the race of the
Bacchiadæ, a powerful Corinthian family, being expelled from
Corinth, was said to have founded Syracuse, the capital of Sicily. The
family sprang either from Bacchius, a son of Dionysus , or Bacchus, or
from the fifth king of Corinth, who was named Bacchis. The family was
expelled from Corinth by Cypselus, either on account of their luxury and
extravagant mode of life, or because they were supposed to aim at the
sovereignty. 52. With its two seas. ]—Ver. 407. Corinth is called ‘Bimaris’
by the Latin poets, from its having the Ægean sea on one side of it, and
the Ionian sea on the other. 53. Built a city. ]—Ver. 408. Syracuse had two harbors, one of
which was much larger than the other. 54. Cyane. ]—Ver. 412. According to Claudian, Cyane was one of
the companions of Proserpine, when she was carried off by Pluto. 55. Anapis. ]—Ver. 417. This was a river of Sicily, which,
mingling with the waters of the fountain Cyane, falls into the sea at
Syracuse, opposite to the island of Ortygia. This island, in which the
fountain of Arethusa was situate, was separated from the isle of Sicily
by a narrow strait of the sea, and communicating with the city of
Syracuse by a bridge, was considered as part of it. 56. An old woman. ]—Ver. 449. Arnobius calls this old woman here
mentioned by the name of Baubo. Nicander, in his Theriaca, calls her
Metaneira. Antoninus Liberalis calls her Misma, and Ovid, in the fourth
Book of the Fasti, Melanina. 57. Lately distilled. ]—Ver. 450. Orpheus, in his Hymn, calls
the drink given by the old woman to Ceres κυκεὼν . According to Arnobius, it was a mixed liquor,
called by the Romans ‘ cinnus ;’ made of parched pearled barley, honey, and wine,
with flowers and various herbs floating in it. Antoninus Liberalis says,
that Ceres drank it off, ἀθρόως , ‘at one draught.’ 58. A boy. ]—Ver. 451. According to Nicander, the boy was the
son of the old woman. If so, the Goddess made her but a poor return for
her hospitality. 59. A tedious task. ]—Ver. 463. ‘Dicere longa mora est,’ is
rendered by Clarke, ‘It is a tedious business to tell.’ 60. The girdle. ]—Ver. 470. The zone, or girdle,
a fastening round the loins, was much worn by both sexes among the ancients. It was
sometimes made of netted work, and the chief use of it was for holding
up the tunic, and keeping it from dragging on the ground. Among the
Romans, the Magister Equitum, or ‘Master of the Horse,’ wore a girdle of
red leather, embroidered by the needle, and having its extremities
joined by a gold buckle. It also formed part of the cuirass of the
warrior. The girdle was used sometimes by men to hold money instead of a
purse; and the ‘pera,’ ‘wallet,’ or ‘purse,’ was generally fastened to
the girdle. As this article of dress was used to hold up the garments
for the sake of expedition, it was loosened when people were supposed to
be abstracted from the cares of the world, as in performing sacrifice or
attending at funeral rites. A girdle was also worn by the young
women, even when the tunic was not girt up; and it was only discontinued
by them on the day of marriage. To that circumstance, allusion is made
in the present instance, as a proof of the violence that had been
committed on Proserpine. 61. Had been carried away. ]—Ver. 471. Clarke translates ‘ tunc B denique raptam Scisset,’ ‘knew that she had been kidnapped.’ 62. Alpheian Nymph. ]—Ver. 487. Alpheus was a river of Elis, in
the northwestern part of Peloponnesus. Its present name is ‘Carbon.’ 63. Beheld by my eyes. ]—Ver. 505. Ovid here makes Arethusa the
discoverer to Ceres of the fate of her daughter. In the Fourth Book of
the Fasti, he represents the Sun as giving her that information, in
which he follows the account given by Homer. Apollodorus describes the
descent of Pluto as taking place at Hermione, a town of Argolis, in
Peloponnesus, and the people of that place as informing Ceres of what
had happened to her daughter. 64. If you call it finding. ]—Ver. 520. This remark of the
Goddess is very like that of the Irish sailor, who vowed that a thing
could not be said to be lost when one knows where it is; and that his
master’s kettle was quite safe, for he knew it to be at the bottom of
the sea. 65. Plucked a pomegranate. ]—Ver. 535. It was for this reason
that the Thesmophoriazusæ, in the performance of the rites of Ceres,
were especially careful not to taste the pomegranate. This fruit was
most probably called ‘malum,’ or ‘pomum punicum,’ or ‘puniceum,’ from
the deep red or purple color of the inside, and not as having been first
introduced from Phœnicia. 66. Seven grains. ]—Ver. 537. He says here ‘seven,’ but in the
Fourth Book of the Fasti, only ‘three’ grains. 67. Ascalaphus. ]—Ver. 539. He was the son of Acheron, by the
Nymph Orphne, or Gorgyra, according to Apollodorus. The latter author
says, that for his unseasonable discovery, Ceres placed a rock upon him;
but that, having been liberated by Hercules, she changed him into an
owl, called ὦτον . The Greek
name of a lizard being ἀσκάλαβος , Mellman thinks that the transformation of
the boy into a newt, or kind of lizard, which has just been related by
the Poet, may have possibly originated in a confused version of the
story of Ascalaphus. 68. Avernus. ]—Ver. 540. Avernus was a lake of Campania, near
Baiæ, of a fetid smell and gloomy aspect. Being feigned to be the mouth,
or threshold, of the Infernal Regions, its name became generally used to
signify Tartarus, or the Infernal Regions. The name is said to have been
derived from the Greek word ἄορνος , ‘without birds,’ or ‘unfrequented by birds,’ as
they could not endure the exhalations that were emitted by it. 69. Phlegethon. ]—Ver. 544. This was a burning river of the
Infernal Regions; which received its name from the Greek word φλέγω , ‘to burn.’ 70. Acheloüs. ]—Ver. 552. The Sirens were said to be the
daughters of the river Acheloüs and of one of the Muses, either
Calliope, Melpomene, or Terpsichore. 71. Stream of Elis. ]—Ver. 576. The Alpheus really rose in
Arcadia; but, as it ran through the territory of the Eleans, and
discharged itself into the sea, near Cyllene, the seaport of that
people, they worshipped it with divine honors. 72. Stymphalian. ]—Ver. 585. Stymphalus was the name of a city,
mountain, and river of Arcadia, near the territory of Elis. 73. Hoary willows. ]—Ver. 590. The leaf of the willow has a
whitish hue, especially on one side of it. 74. Orchomenus. ]—Ver. 607. This was a city of Arcadia, in a
marshy district, near to Mantinea. There was another place of the same
name, in Bœotia, between Elatea and Coronea, famous for a splendid
temple to the Graces, there erected. 75. Psophis. ]—Ver. 607. This was a city of Arcadia also,
adjoining to the Elean territory, which received its name from Psophis,
the daughter of Lycaon, or of Eryx, according to some writers. There
were several other towns of the same name. The other places here
mentioned, with the exception of Elis, were mountains of Arcadia. 76. Ho, Arethusa! ]—Ver. 625-6. Clarke thus translates these
lines:—‘And twice called out Soho, Arethusa! Soho, Arethusa! What
thought had I then, poor soul!’ 77. To Ortygia. ]—Ver. 640. From the similarity of its name to
that of the Goddess Diana, who was called Ortygia, from the Isle of
Delos, where she was born. 78. Goddess yoked. ]—Ver. 642. Clarke renders ‘geminos Dea
fertilis angues curribus admovit,’ ‘the fertile Goddess clapped two
snakes to her chariot.’ 79. Lands of Asia. ]—Ver. 648. Asia Minor is here meant; the
other parts of Asia being included under the term ‘Scythicas oras.’ 80. Mopsopian. ]—Ver. 661. This very uneuphonious name is
derived from Mopsopus, one of the ancient kings of Attica. It here means
‘Athenian.’ 81. The greatest of us. ]—Ver. 662. Namely, Calliope, who had
commenced her song as the representative of the Muses, at line 341. Supplementary Notes ( added by transcriber ) A. ... the Pontic Epistles (Book i. Ep. 5, l. 79). In the Bell
printing, the “l” of “l. 79” is damaged and can be misread as
an “i”. B. tunc denique raptam: Ovid V.471. The readings “tunc” and “tum” are both
found, with no difference in meter or translation, but “raptum” for
“raptam” is an error. 212 189 BOOK THE SIXTH. FABLE I. Arachne , vain-glorious of her
ingenuity, challenges Minerva to a contest of skill in her art. The
Goddess accepts the challenge, and, being enraged to see herself
outdone, strikes her rival with her shuttle; upon which, Arachne, in her
distress, hangs herself. Minerva, touched with compassion, transforms
her into a spider. Tritonia had meanwhile lent
an ear to such recitals as these, and she approved of the songs of the
Aonian maids, and their just resentment. Then thus she says to
herself: “To commend is but a trifling matter; let us, too, deserve
commendation, and let us not permit our divine majesty to be slighted
without due punishment.” And then she turns her mind to
the fate of the Mæonian Arachne; who, as she had heard, did not yield to
her in the praises of the art of working in wool. She was renowned not
for the place of her birth , nor for the origin of her family, but
for her skill alone . Idmon, of Colophon, 1 her father, used to dye
the soaking wool in Phocæan 2 purple. 3 Her mother was dead; but she, too,
was of the lower rank, and of the same condition with her husband. Yet Arachne , by her skill, had acquired a memorable name throughout
the cities of Lydia; although, born of a humble family, she used to live
in the little town of Hypæpæ. 4 Often 213 VI. 14-41 did the Nymphs desert the 190 VI. 15-45 vineyards of their own Tymolus, that they might look at her admirable
workmanship; often did the Nymphs of the river Pactolus 5 forsake their streams. And not only did it give them pleasure to look at
the garments when made, but even, too, while they were being made, so
much grace was there in her working. Whether it was that she was rolling
the rough wool into its first balls, or whether she was unravelling the
work with her fingers, and was softening the fleeces worked over again
with long drawings out, equalling the mists in their fineness ; or
whether she was moving the smooth round spindle with her nimble
thumb, or was embroidering with the needle, you might perceive that she
had been instructed by Pallas. This, however, she used to deny; and, being displeased with a
mistress so famed, she said, “Let her contend with me. There is nothing
which, if conquered, I should refuse to endure .” Pallas
personates an old woman; she both places false gray hair on her temples,
and supports as well her infirm limbs by a staff. Then thus she begins
to speak: “Old age has not everything which we should avoid; experience
comes from lengthened years. Do not despise my advice; let the greatest
fame for working wool be sought by thee among mortals. But yield
to the Goddess, and, rash woman, ask pardon for thy speeches with
suppliant voice. She will grant pardon at my entreaty.” The other beholds her with scowling eyes , and leaves the threads she has
begun; and scarcely restraining her hand, and discovering her anger by
her looks, with such words as these does she reply to the disguised
Pallas: “Thou comest here bereft of thy understanding, and worn
out with prolonged old age; and it is thy misfortune to have lived too
long. If thou hast any daughter-in-law, if thou hast any daughter of
thy own , let her listen to these remarks. I have sufficient
knowledge for myself in myself, and do not imagine that thou hast
availed anything by thy advice; my 214 VI. 42-67 opinion is still the same. Why does not she come herself? why
does she decline this contest?” Then the Goddess says, “Lo! she is come;” and she casts aside the
figure of an old woman, and shows herself as Pallas. The Nymphs
and the Mygdonian 6 matrons venerate the Goddess. 191 VI. 45-73 The virgin alone is not daunted. But still she blushes, and a sudden
flush marks her reluctant features, and again it vanishes; just as the sky is wont to become tinted with purple, when Aurora is first
stirring, and after a short time to grow white from the influence of the
Sun. She persists in her determination, and, from a desire for a foolish
victory, she rushes upon her own destruction. Nor, indeed, does the
daughter of Jupiter decline it , or advise her any further, nor
does she now put off the contest. There is no delay; they both take
their stand in different places, and stretch out two webs on the
loom with a fine warp. The web is tied around the beam; the sley separates the warp; the woof is inserted in the
middle with sharp shuttles, which the fingers hurry along, and being
drawn within the warp, the teeth notched in the moving sley strike it.
Both hasten on, and girding up their garments to their breasts, they
move their skilful arms, their eagerness beguiling their fatigue. There
both the purple is being woven, which is subjected to the Tyrian brazen
vessel, 7 and fine shades of minute difference; just as the
rainbow, with its mighty arch, is wont to tint a long tract of the sky
by means of the rays reflected by the shower: in which, though a
thousand different colors are shining, yet the very transition eludes
the eyes that look upon it; to such a degree is that which is adjacent
the same; and yet the extremes are different. There, too, the 215 VI. 68-90 pliant gold is mixed with the threads, and ancient subjects are
represented on the webs. Pallas embroiders the rock of Mars 8 in Athens , the citadel of
Cecrops, and the old dispute about the name of the country. Twice six 9 celestial Gods are sitting on lofty seats in august 192 VI. 73-95 state, with Jupiter in the midst. His own proper likeness distinguishes
each of the Gods. The form of Jupiter is that of a monarch. She makes
the God of the sea to be standing there , and to be striking the
rugged rocks with his long trident, and a wild horse to be
springing forth 10 out of the midst of the opening of the rock; by which
pledge of his favor he lays claim to the city. But to herself she
gives the shield, she gives the lance with its sharp point; she gives
the helmet to her head, and her breast is protected by the Ægis.
She there represents, too, the earth struck by her spear,
producing a shoot of pale olive with its berries, and the Gods admiring
it. Victory is the end of her work. But that the rival of her fame may
learn from precedents what reward to expect for an attempt so mad, she
adds, in four different parts, four contests bright in their
coloring, and distinguished by diminutive figures. One corner contains
Thracian Rhodope and Hæmus, now cold mountains, formerly human bodies,
who assumed to themselves the names of the supreme Gods. Another part
contains the wretched fate of the Pygmæan matron. 11 Her, overcome 216 VI. 91-110 in a contest, Juno commanded to be a crane, and to wage war against her
own people. She depicts, too, Antigone, 12 who once dared to contend with
the wife of the great Jupiter; and whom the royal Juno changed
into a bird; nor did Ilion protect 193 VI. 95-114 her, or her father Laomedon, from assuming wings, and as a white
crane, from commending herself with her chattering beak. The only corner
that remains, represents the bereft Cinyras; 13 and he, embracing the
steps of a temple, once the limbs of his own daughters, and lying
upon the stone, appears to be weeping. She surrounds the exterior
borders with peaceful olive. That is the close; and with her own tree
she puts an end to the work. The Mæonian Nymph delineates Europa, deceived by the form of the
bull; and you would think it a real bull, and real sea. She herself
seems to be looking upon the land which she has left, and to be crying
out to her companions, and to be in dread of the touch of the dashing
waters, and to be drawing up her timid feet. She drew also Asterie, 14 seized by the struggling eagle; and made Leda, reclining beneath the
wings of the swan. She added, how Jupiter, concealed under the form of a 217 VI. 110-118 Satyr, impregnated Antiope , 15 the beauteous daughter of Nycteus,
with a twin offspring; how he was Amphitryon, when he beguiled
thee, Tirynthian 16 dame; how, turned to gold, he deceived Danaë; how , changed into fire, the daughter of Asopus; 17 how , as
a shepherd, Mnemosyne; 18 194 VI. 114-126 and as a speckled serpent, Deois. 19 She depicted thee too, Neptune,
changed into a fierce bull, with the virgin daughter 20 of Æolus.
Thou, seeming to be Enipeus, 21 didst beget the Aloïdæ; as a ram,
thou didst delude Theophane , the daughter of Bisaltis. 22 Thee too
the most bounteous mother of corn, with her yellow hair, experienced 23 as a steed; thee, the mother 24 of the winged horse, with her snaky
locks, received as a bird; 218 VI. 119-139 Melantho, 25 as a dolphin. To all these did she give their own
likeness, and the real appearance of the various localities. There was Phœbus, under the form of a rustic; and how, besides , he was wearing the wings of a hawk at one time, at
another the skin of a lion; how, too, as a shepherd, he deceived Isse, 26 the daughter of Macareus. How Liber deceived Erigone, 27 in a
fictitious bunch of grapes; and how Saturn 28 195 VI. 126-145 begot the two-formed Chiron, in the form of a horse. The extreme
part of the web, being enclosed in a fine border, had flowers interwoven
with the twining ivy. Pallas could not blame that work, nor could Envy censure it.
The yellow-haired Virgin grieved at her success, and tore the web
embroidered with the criminal acts of the Gods of heaven. And as she was
holding her shuttle made of boxwood from Mount Cytorus, three or
four times did she strike the forehead of Arachne, the daughter of
Idmon. The unhappy creature could not endure it; and being of a high
spirit, she tied up her throat in a halter. Pallas, taking compassion,
bore her up as she hung; and thus she said: “Live on indeed, wicked
one, 29 but still hang; and let the same decree of punishment
be pronounced against thy race, and against thy latest posterity, that
thou mayst not be free from care in time to come.” After that, as she
departed, she sprinkled her with the juices of an Hecatean herb; 30 219 VI. 140-145 and immediately her hair, touched by the noxious drug, fell off, and
together with it her nose and ears. The head of herself, now small as well throughout her whole body, becomes very small. Her slender
fingers cleave to her sides as legs; her belly takes possession of the
rest of her ; but out of this she gives forth a thread; and as a spider, she works at her web as formerly. EXPLANATION. The story of Arachne is most probably based upon the simple fact, that
she was the most skilful artist of her time, at working in silk and
wool. Pliny the Elder tells us, that Arachne, the daughter of Idmon,
a Lydian by birth, and of low extraction, invented the art of
making linen cloths and nets; which invention was also by some
attributed to Minerva. This competition, then, for the merit of the
invention, is the foundation of the challenge here described by the
Poet. As, however, Arachne is said to have hanged herself in despair,
she probably fell a prey to some cause of grief or discontent, the
particulars of which, in their simple form, have 196 not come down to us. Perhaps the similarity of her name and employment
with those of the spider, as known among the Greeks, gave rise to the
story of her alleged transformation; unless we should prefer to attribute the story
to the fact of the Hebrew word “arag,” signifying to spin, and, in some
degree, resembling her name. In this story, Ovid takes the opportunity of touching upon several
fables, the subjects whereof he states to have been represented in the
works of Minerva and Arachne. He alludes, among other matters, to the
dispute between Neptune and Minerva, about giving a name to the city of
Athens. St. Augustine , on the authority of Varro, says, that
Cecrops, in building that city, found an olive tree and a fountain, and
that the oracle at Delphi, on being consulted, stating that both Minerva
and Neptune had a right to name the city, the Senate decided in favor of
the Goddess; and this circumstance, he says, gave rise to the story.
According to some writers, it was based on the fact, that Cranaüs
changed the name of the city from Poseidonius, which it was called after
Neptune, to Athenæ, after his own daughter Athena: and as the Areiopagus
sanctioned this change, it was fabled that Neptune had been overcome by
the judgment of the Gods. The Jesuit Tournemine suggests the following explanation of the
story:—He says, that the aborigines of Attica, being conquered by
the Pelasgians, learned from them the art of navigation, which they
turned to account by becoming pirates. Cecrops, bringing a 220 colony from Saïs, in Egypt, tried to abolish this barbarous custom, and
taught them a more civilized mode of life; and, among other things, he
showed them how to till the earth, and to raise the olive, for the
cultivation of which he found the soil very favorable. He also
introduced the worship of Minerva, or Athena, as she was called,
a Goddess highly honored at Saïs, and to whom the olive tree was
dedicated. Her the Athenians afterwards regarded as the patroness of
their city, which they called after her name. Athens becoming famous for
its olives, and, considerable profit arising from their cultivation, the
new settlers attempted to wean the natives from piracy, by calling their
attention to agricultural pursuits. To succeed in this, they
composed a fable, in which Neptune was said to be overcome by Minerva;
who, even in the judgment of the twelve greater deities, had found out
something of more utility than he. This fable Tournemine supposes to
have been composed in the ancient language of the country, which was the
Phrygian, mingled with many Phœnician words; and, as in those languages
the same word signifies either a ship or a horse, those who afterwards
interpreted the fable, took the word in the latter signification, and
spoke of a horse instead of a ship, which was really the original emblem
employed in the fiction. Vossius thinks that the fable originated in a dispute between the
sailors of Athens, who acknowledged Neptune for their chief, and the
people, who followed the Senate, governed by Minerva. The people
prevailed, and a life of civilization, marked by attention to the
pursuits of agriculture, was substituted for one of piracy; which gave
occasion for the saying, that Minerva had overcome Neptune. With reference to the intrigues and lustful actions attributed to the 197 various Deities by Arachne in the delineations on her embroidery, we may
here remark, by way of elucidating the origin of these stories in
general, that, in early times, when the earth was sunk in ignorance and
superstition, and might formed the only right in the heathen world,
where a king or petty chieftain demanded the daughter of a neighbor in
marriage, and met with a refusal, he immediately had recourse to arms,
to obtain her by force. Their standards and ships, on these expeditions,
carrying their ensigns, consisting of birds, beasts, or fabulous
monsters, gave occasion to those who described their feats of prowess to
say, that the ravisher had changed himself into a bull, an eagle, or a
lion, for the purpose of effecting his object. The kings and potentates
of those days, being frequently called Jupiter, Apollo, Neptune, etc.,
and the priests of the Gods so named often obtaining their ends by
assuming the names of the Divinities they served, we can account the
more easily for the number of intrigues and abominable actions, attended
by changes and transformations, which the poets and mythologists
attribute to many of the Deities. Palæphatus suggests a very ingenious method of accounting for these
stories; founded, however, it must be owned, on a very low estimate of
female virtue in those times. He says, that these fabulous narratives
originate in the figures of different animals which were engraved on the
coins of those times; and that, when money was given to buy over or to
procure the seduction of a female, it was afterward said that the lover
had himself taken the 221 VI. 146-148 figure which was represented on the coin, by means of which his object
had been effected. Ovid, in common with many of the ancient historians, geographers, and
naturalists, mentions the Pygmies, of which, from the time of Homer
downwards, a nation was supposed to exist, in a state of continual
warfare with the Cranes. Aristotle, who believed in their existence,
placed them in Æthiopia; Pliny, Solinus, and Philostratus in India, near
the source of the Ganges; others again, in Scythia, on the banks of the
Danube. Some of the moderns have attempted to explain the origin of this
prevalent notion. Olaüs Magnus thinks the Samoeids and Laplanders to
have been the Pygmies of Homer. Gesner and others fancy that they have
found their originals in Thuringia; while Albertus Magnus supposed that
the Pygmies were the monkeys, which are so numerous in the interior of Africa, and
which were taken for human beings of diminutive stature. Vander Hart,
who has written a most ingenious treatise on the subject, suggests that
the fable originated in a war between two cities in Greece, Pagæ and
Gerania, the similarity of whose names to those of the Pygmies and the
Cranes, gave occasion to their neighbors, the Corinthians, to confer on
them those nicknames. It is most probable, however, that the story was
founded upon the diminutive stature of some of the native tribes of the
interior of Africa. As to the fable of Pygas being changed into a crane, Banier suggests,
that the origin of it may be found in the work of Antoninus Liberalis,
quoting from the Theogony of Bœus. That poet, whose works are lost,
says, that among the Pygmies there was a very beautiful princess, named
Œnoë, who greatly oppressed her subjects. Having married Nicodamas, she
had by him a son, named Mopsus, whom her subjects seized upon, to 198 VI. 146-166 educate him in their own way. She accordingly raised levies against her
own subjects; and that circumstance, together with the name of Gerane,
which, according to Ælian, she also bore, gave rise to the fable, which
said that she was changed into a crane; the resemblance which it bore to
‘geranos,’ the Greek for ‘a crane,’ suggesting the foundation of the
story. FABLE II. The Theban matrons, forming a solemn
procession in honor of Latona, Niobe esteems herself superior to the
Goddess, and treats her and her offspring with contempt; on which,
Apollo and Diana, to avenge the affront offered to their mother, destroy
all the children of Niobe; and she, herself, is changed into a
statue. All Lydia is in an uproar, and the
rumor of the fact goes through the town of Phrygia, and fills the wide
world with discourse thereon . Before her own marriage Niobe had
known her, 31 at the time, when still 222 VI. 149-176 single, she was inhabiting Mæonia and Sipylus. 32 And yet by the
punishment of her countrywoman, Arachne, she was not warned to yield to
the inhabitants of Heaven, and to use less boastful words. Many things
augmented her pride; but yet, neither the skill of her husband, nor the
descent of them both, nor the sovereignty of a mighty kingdom, pleased
her so much (although all of them did please her) as her own progeny;
and Niobe might have been pronounced the happiest of mothers, if she had
not so seemed to herself. For Manto, the daughter of Tiresias, foreknowing the future, urged by
a divine impulse, had proclaimed through the middle of the streets, “Ye
women of Ismenus, go all of you, 33 and give to Latona, and the two
children of Latona, the pious frankincense, together with prayers, and
wreathe your hair with laurel; by my mouth does Latona command this .” Obedience is paid; and all the Theban women adorn their
temples with leaves of laurel , as commanded, and offer
frankincense on the sacred fires, and words of supplication. Lo! Niobe
comes, surrounded with a crowd of attendants, conspicuous for the 199 VI. 146-166 gold interwoven in her Phrygian garments, and beautiful, so far as anger
will allow; and tossing her hair, hanging down on both shoulders, with
her graceful head, she stands still; and as she loftily casts around her
haughty eyes, she says, “What madness is this to prefer the inhabitants of
Heaven, that you have only heard of, to those who are seen? or
why is Latona worshipped at the altars, and my Godhead is still
without its due frankincense? Tantalus was my father, who alone
was allowed to approach the tables of the Gods above. The sister of the
Pleiades 34 is my mother; the most mighty Atlas is my grandsire,
who bears the æthereal skies upon his neck. Jupiter is my other
grandsire; of him, too, I 223 VI. 176-200 boast as my father-in-law. 35 The Phrygian nations dread me; the
palace of Cadmus is subject to me as its mistress; and the walls that
were formed by the strings of my husband’s lyre , together with
their people, are governed by me and my husband; to whatever part of the
house I turn my eyes, immense wealth is seen. To this is added a face
worthy of a Goddess. Add to this my seven daughters, 36 and as many
sons, and, at a future day, sons-in-law and daughters-in-law. Now
inquire what ground my pride has for its existence ; and presume
to prefer Latona the Titaness, the daughter of some obscure Cæus, to
whom, when in travail, 37 the great earth once refused a little spot, to
myself. Neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by water, was your Goddess
received; she was banished the world, till Delos, pitying the wanderer,
said, “Thou dost roam a stranger on the land, I in the waves;” and
gave her an unstable place of rest . She was made the mother of
two children, that is but the seventh part of my issue. I am
fortunate, and who shall deny it? and fortunate I shall remain; who,
too, can doubt of that? 200 VI. 194-227 Plenty has made me secure; I am too great for Fortune possibly to
hurt; and, though she should take away many things from me, even
then much more will she leave me: my many blessings have now
risen superior to apprehensions. Suppose it possible for some part of
this multitude of my children to be taken away from me ; still,
thus stripped, I shall not be reduced to two, the number of Latona;
an amount, by the number of which, how far, I pray , is she
removed from one that is childless? Go from the sacrifice; 224 VI. 200-230 hasten away from the sacrifice, and remove the laurel from your
hair!” They remove it, and the sacrifice they leave unperformed; and what
they can do, they adore the Divinity in gentle murmurs. The Goddess was
indignant; and on the highest top of Mount Cynthus, she spoke to
her two children in such words as these: “Behold! I, your mother,
proud of having borne you, and who shall yield to no one of the
Goddesses, except to Juno alone , am called in question whether I
am a Goddess, and, for all future ages, I am driven from the altars
devoted to me , unless you give me aid. Nor is this my only grief;
the daughter of Tantalus has added abusive language to her shocking
deeds, and has dared to postpone you to her own children, and (what I
wish may fall upon herself), she has called me childless; and
the profane wretch has discovered a tongue like her father’s.” 38 To this relation Latona was going to add entreaties, when Phœbus said,
“Cease thy complaints, ’tis prolonging the delay of her punishment.”
Phœbe said the same; and, by a speedy descent through the air, they
arrived, covered with clouds, at the citadel of Cadmus. There was near the walls a plain, level, and extending far and wide,
trampled continually by horses, where multitudes of wheels and hard
hoofs had softened the clods placed beneath them. There, part of the
seven sons of Amphion are mounting upon their spirited steeds, and press
their backs, red with the Tyrian dye, and wield the reins heavy with
gold; of these, Ismenus, who had formerly been the first burden of his
mother, while he is guiding the steps of the horses in a perfect circle,
and is curbing their foaming mouths, cries aloud, “Ah, wretched me!”
and, pierced through the middle of his breast, 201 VI. 228-256 bears a dart therein ; and the reins dropping from his dying hand,
by degrees he falls on his side, over the horse’s shoulder. The
next to him , Sipylus, on hearing the sound of a quiver in the
air, gives 225 VI. 230-256 rein 39 to his horse ; as when the pilot, sensible of
the storm approaching , flies on seeing a cloud, and unfurls the
hanging sails on every side, that the light breeze may by no means
escape them. He gives rein, I said ; while thus giving it, the
unerring dart overtakes him, and an arrow sticks quivering in the top of
his neck, and the bare steel protrudes from his throat. He, as he is
bending forward, rolls over the neck, now let loose, and over the mane, and stains the ground with his warm blood. The
unhappy Phædimus, and Tantalus, the heir to the name of his grandsire,
when they had put an end to their wonted exercise of riding , had
turned to the youthful exercises of the palæstra, glowing with oil; 40 and now had they brought 41 breast to breast, struggling in a close
grapple, when an arrow, sped onward from the stretched bow, pierced them
both, just as they were united together. At the same instant they
groaned aloud, and together they laid their limbs on the ground,
writhing with pain; together as they lay, for the last time, they rolled
their eyeballs, and together they breathed forth their life. Alphenor sees this, and, beating his torn breast, flies to them, to
lift up their cold limbs in his embrace, and falls in this affectionate
duty. For the Delian God pierces the inner part of his midriff with the
fatal steel. Soon as it is pulled out, a part of his lungs is
dragged forth on the barbs, and his blood is poured forth, with his
life, into the air; but no single wound reaches the unshaven
Damasicthon. He is struck where the leg commences, and where the sinewy
ham 202 VI. 256-290 makes the 226 VI. 256-287 space between the joints soft; and while he is trying with his hand to
draw out the fatal weapon, another arrow is driven through his neck, up
to the feathers. The blood drives this out, and itself starting forth,
springs up on high, and, piercing the air, spouts forth afar. The last of them , Ilioneus, had raised his unavailing arms in prayer, and
had said, “O, all ye Gods, in common, (not knowing that all were
not to be addressed) spare me!” The God , the bearer of the bow,
was moved, when now his arrow could not be recalled; yet he died with
the slightest wound of all , his heart not being struck deep by
the arrow. The report of this calamity, and the grief of the people, and the
tears of her family, made the mother acquainted with a calamity so
sudden, wondering that it could have happened, and enraged that the Gods
above had dared this, and that they enjoyed a privilege so great.
For Amphion the father, thrusting his sword through his breast, dying,
had ended his grief together with his life. Alas! how different is this
Niobe from that Niobe who had lately driven the people from the altars
of Latona, and, with lofty head, had directed her steps through the
midst of the city, envied by her own people, but now to be pitied even
by an enemy! She falls down upon the cold bodies, and with no
distinction she distributes her last kisses among all her sons. Raising
her livid arms from these towards heaven, she says, “Glut thyself, cruel
Latona, with my sorrow; glut thyself, and satiate thy breast with my
mourning; satiate, too, thy relentless heart with seven deaths.
I have received my death-blow; 42 exult and triumph, my victorious enemy. But why victorious ? More remains to me, in my misery, than
to thee, in thy happiness. Even after so many deaths, I am the
conqueror.” Thus she spoke; when the string twanged from
the bent bow, which affrighted all but Niobe alone; she became bold by her misfortunes. 227 VI. 288-312 The sisters were standing in black array, with their hair dishevelled,
before the biers 43 of their brothers. One of these, 203 VI. 290-312 drawing out the weapon sticking in her entrails, about to die, swooned
away, with her face placed upon her brother. Another, endeavoring to
console her wretched parent, was suddenly silent, and was doubled
together with an invisible wound; and did not close her mouth, until
after the breath had departed. Another, vainly flying, falls down;
another dies upon her sister; another lies hid; another you might see
trembling. And now six being put to death, and having received
different wounds, the last only remains; her mother covering her
with all her body, and with all her garments, cries, “Leave me
but one, and that the youngest; the youngest only do I ask out of so
many, and that but one.” And while she was entreating, she, for
whom she was entreating, was slain. Childless, she sat down among her
dead sons and daughters and husband, and became hardened by her woes.
The breeze moves no hair of hers ; in her features is a color
without blood; her eyes stand unmoved in her sad cheeks; in her form
there is no appearance of life. Her tongue itself, too, congeals
within, together with her hardened palate, and the veins cease to be
able to be moved. Her neck can neither be bent, nor can her arms give
any motion, nor her feet move. Within her entrails, too, it is
stone. Still did she weep on; and, enveloped in a hurricane of mighty wind,
she was borne away to her native land. There, fixed on the top of a
mountain, 44 she dissolves; and even yet does the marble distil
tears. 228 EXPLANATION. All the ancient historians agree with Diodorus Siculus and Apollodorus,
that Niobe was the daughter of Tantalus, and the sister of Pelops; but
she must not be confounded with a second Niobe, who was the daughter of
Phoroneus, and the first mortal (Homer tells us) with whom Jupiter fell
in love. Homer says that she was the mother of twelve children, six sons
and six daughters. Herodotus says, that she had but two sons and three
daughters. Diodorus Siculus makes her the mother of fourteen 204 children, seven of each sex. Apollodorus, on the authority of Hesiod,
says, that she had ten sons and as many daughters; but gives the names
of fourteen only. The story of the destruction of her children is most
likely based upon truth, and bears reference to a historical fact. The
plague, which ravaged the city of Thebes, destroyed all the children of
Niobe; and contagious distempers being attributed to the excessive heat
of the sun, it was fabled that Apollo had killed them with his arrows;
while women, who died of the plague, were said to owe their death to the
anger of Diana. Thus, Homer says, that Laodamia and the mother of
Andromache were killed by Diana. Valerius Flaccus relates the sorrow of Clytie , the
wife of Cyzicus, on the death of her mother, killed by the same Goddess;
so the Scholiast on Pindar (Pythia, ode iii.) says, on the authority of
Pherecydes, that Apollo sent Diana to kill Coronis and several other
women. Eustathius distinctly asserts, that the poets attributed the
deaths of men, who died of the plague, to Apollo; and those of women,
dying a similar death, to Diana. This supposition is based upon rational and just grounds; since many
contagious distempers may be clearly traced to the exhalations of the
earth, acted on by the intense heat of the sun. Homer, most probably,
means this, when he says that the plague came upon the Grecian camp, on
the God, in his anger, discharging his arrows against it; or, in other
words, when the extreme heat of his rays had caused a corruption of the
atmosphere. It may be here observed, that arrows were the symbol of
Apollo, when angry, and the harp when he was propitious. Diogenes
Laertius tells us, that, during the prevalence of the plague, it was the
custom to place branches of laurel on the doors of the houses, in the
hope that the God, being reminded of Daphne, would spare the places
which thereby claimed his protection. Ovid says, that the sons of Niobe were killed while managing their
horses; but Pausanias tells us that they died on Mount Cithæron, while
engaged in hunting, and that her daughters died at Thebes. Homer says,
that her children remained nine days without burial, because the Gods
changed the Thebans into stones, and that the offended Divinities
themselves performed the funeral rites on the tenth day; the meaning
probably, is, that, they dying of the plague, no one ventured to bury
them, and all seemed insensible to the sorrows of Niobe, as each
consulted his own safety. Ismenus, her eldest son, not being able to
endure the pain of his malady, is said to have thrown himself into a
river of Bœotia, 229 VI. 313-327 which, from that circumstance, received his name. After the death of her
husband and children, Niobe is said to have retired to Mount Sipylus, in
Lydia, where she died. Here, as Pausanias informs us, was a rock,
resembling, at a distance, a woman overwhelmed with grief; though
according to the same author, who had visited it, the resemblance could
not be traced on approaching it. On this ground, Ovid relates, that she
was borne on a whirlwind to the top of a Lydian mountain, where she was
changed into a rock. Pausanias tells us, that Melibœa, or Chloris, and Amycle, two of her
daughters, appeased Diana, who preserved their lives; or that, in other
words, they recovered from the plague; though he inclines to credit the
version of Homer, who says that all of her children died by the hands of 205 VI. 313-341 Apollo and Diana. Melibœa received the surname of Chloris, from the
paleness which ensued on her alarm at the sudden death of her
sisters. FABLE III. Latona , fatigued with the burden of her
two children, during a long journey, and parched with thirst, goes to
drink at a pond, near which some countrymen are at work. These clowns,
in a brutal manner, not only hinder her from drinking, but trouble the
water to make it muddy; on which, the Goddess, to punish their
brutality, transforms them into frogs. But then, all, both women and men,
dread the wrath of the divinity, thus manifested, and with more
zeal than ever all venerate with divine worship the great
godhead of the Deity who produced the twins; and, as commonly happens, from a recent fact they recur to the narration of former
events. One of them says, “Some countrymen of old, in the fields of fertile
Lycia, once insulted the Goddess, but not with impunity.
The thing, indeed, is but little known, through the obscure station of
the individuals, still it is wonderful. I have seen upon the spot,
the pool and the lake noted for the miracle. For my father being now
advanced in years, and incapable of travel, ordered me to bring thence
some choice oxen, and on my setting out, had given me a guide of that
nation: with whom, while I was traversing the pastures, behold! an
ancient altar, black with the ashes of sacrifices, was standing in the
middle of a lake, surrounded with quivering reeds. My guide stood still,
and said in a timid whisper, ‘Be propitious to me;’ and 230 VI. 328-349 with a like whisper, I said, ‘Be propitious.’ However, I asked him
whether it was an altar of the Naiads, or of Faunus, or of some native
God; when the stranger answered me in such words; A ‘Young man, there is no
mountain Divinity for this altar. She calls this her own, whom once the
royal Juno banished from the world; whom the wandering Delos, at the
time when it was swimming as a light island, hardly received at her
entreaties. There Latona, leaning against a palm, together with the tree
of Pallas, brought forth twins, in spite of their stepmother Juno . Hence, too, the newly delivered Goddess is said to
have fled from Juno, and in her bosom to have carried the two
divinities, her children. And now the Goddess, wearied with her
prolonged toil, being parched with the heat of the season, 206 VI. 341-365 contracted thirst in the country of Lycia, which bred the Chimæra 45 when the intense sun was scorching the fields; the craving children,
too, had exhausted her suckling breasts. By chance she beheld a lake 46 of fine
water, in the bottom of a valley; some countrymen were there, gathering
bushy osiers, together with bulrushes, and sedge natural to fenny spots.
The Titaness approached, and bending her knee, she pressed the ground,
that she might take up the cool water to drink; the company of rustics
forbade it. The Goddess thus addressed them, as they forbade her: ‘Why
do you deny me water? The use of water is common 231 VI. 350-376 to all . Nature has made neither sun, nor air, nor the running
stream, the property of any one. To her public bounty have I come, which
yet I humbly beg of you to grant me. I was not intending to bathe
my limbs here, and my wearied joints, but to relieve my thirst. My
mouth, as I speak, lacks moisture, and my jaws are parched, and scarce
is there a passage for my voice therein; a draught of water will be
nectar to me, and I shall own, that, together with it, I have
received my life at your hands . In that water you will be
giving me life. Let these, too, move you, who hold out their little arms
from my bosom ’; and by chance the children were holding out their
arms. “What person might not these kindly words of the Goddess have been
able to influence? Still, they persist in hindering the Goddess
thus entreating them; and moreover add threats and abusive language,
if she does not retire to a distance. Nor is this enough. They likewise
muddy the lake itself with their feet and hands; and they raise
the soft mud from 207 VI. 365-383 the very bottom of the water, by spitefully jumping to and fro.
Resentment removes her thirst. For now no longer does the daughter of
Cæus supplicate the unworthy wretches , nor does she any longer
endure to utter words below the majesty of a Goddess; and raising
her hands to heaven, she says, ‘For ever may you live in that pool.’ The
wish of the Goddess comes to pass. They delight to go beneath the water,
and sometimes to plunge the whole of their limbs in the deep pool; now
to raise their heads, and now to swim on the top of the water; oft to sit
on the bank of the pool, and often to leap back again into the
cold stream. And even now do they exercise their offensive tongues in
strife: and banishing all shame, although they are beneath the
water, still beneath the water, 47 do they try to keep 232 VI. 376-387 up their abuse. Their voice, too, is now hoarse, and their bloated necks
swell out; and their very abuse dilates their extended jaws. Their backs
are united to their heads: their necks seem as though cut off; their
backbone is green; their belly, the greatest part of their body, is
white; and as new-made frogs, they leap about in the muddy
stream.” EXPLANATION. This story may possibly be based upon some current tradition of Latona
having been subjected to such cruel treatment from some country clowns;
or, which is more probable, it may have been originally invented as a
satire on the rude manners and uncouth conduct of the peasantry of
ancient times. The story may also have been framed, to account, in a
poetical manner, for the origin of frogs. FABLE IV. The Satyr Marsyas, having challenged
Apollo to a trial of skill on the flute, the God overcomes him, and then
flays him alive for his presumption. The tears that are shed on the
occasion of his death produce the river that bears his name. When thus one, who, it is uncertain,
had related the destruction 208 VI. 383-404 of these men of the Lycian race, another remembers that of the Satyr; 48 whom, overcome in playing on the Tritonian
reed, the son of Latona visited with punishment. “Why,” said he, “art
thou tearing me from myself? Alas! I now repent; alas,”
cried he, “the flute is not of so much value!” As he shrieked aloud, his
skin was stript 49 off from the surface of his 233 VI. 388-411 limbs, nor was he aught but one entire wound. Blood is flowing on
every side; the nerves, exposed, appear, and the quivering veins throb
without any skin. You might have numbered his palpitating bowels, and
the transparent lungs within his breast. The inhabitants of the country,
the Fauns, Deities of the woods, and his brothers the Satyrs, and
Olympus, 50 even then renowned, and the Nymphs lamented him; and
whoever besides on those mountains was feeding the wool-bearing
flocks, and the horned herds. The fruitful earth was moistened, and being moistened received the
falling tears, and drank them up in her lowest veins, which, when she
had turned into a stream, she sent forth into the vacant air. And then,
as the clearest river in Phrygia, running towards the rapid sea within
steep banks, it bears the name of Marsyas. From narratives such as these the people return at once to the
present events, and mourn Amphion extinct together with all his
race. The mother is an object of hatred. Yet her brother Pelops is said alone to have mourned for her as well; and after 209 VI. 405-411 he had drawn his clothes from his shoulder B towards his breast, he discovered
the ivory on his left shoulder. This shoulder, at the time of his birth,
was of the same color with the right one, and was formed of
flesh. They say that the Gods afterwards joined his limbs cut asunder by
the hands of his father; and the rest of them being found, that part
which is midway between the throat and the top of the arm, was wanting.
Ivory was inserted there, in the place of the part that did not appear;
and so by that means Pelops was made entire. EXPLANATION. Marsyas was the son of Hyagnis, the inventor of a peculiar kind of
flute, and of the Phrygian measure. Livy and Quintus Curtius 234 VI. 412-415 tell us, that the story of Apollo and Marsyas is an allegory; and that
the river Marsyas gave rise to it. They say that the river, falling from
a precipice, in the neighborhood of the town of Celenæ, in Phrygia, made
a very stunning and unpleasant noise; but that the smoothness of its
course afterwards gave occasion for the saying, that the vengeance of
Apollo had rendered it more tractable. It is, however, not improbable that the story may have been based on
historical facts. Having learned from his father, Hyagnis, the art of
playing on the flute, and, proud of his skill, at a time when the
musical art was yet in its infancy, Marsyas may have been rash enough to
challenge either a priest of Apollo, or some prince who bore that name,
and, for his presumption, to have received the punishment described by
Ovid. Herodotus certainly credited the story; for he says that the skin
of the unfortunate musician was to be seen, in his time, in the town of
Celenæ. Strabo, Pausanias, and Aulus Gellius also believe its truth.
Suidas tells us, that Marsyas, mortified at his defeat, threw himself
into the river that runs near Celenæ, which, from that time, bore his
name. Strabo says, that Marsyas had stolen the flute from Minerva, which
proved so fatal to him, and had thereby drawn upon himself the
indignation of that Divinity. Ovid, in the Sixth Book of the Fasti, and
Pausanias, quoting from Apollodorus, tell us, that Minerva, having
observed, by seeing herself in the river Meander, that, when she played
on the flute, her cheeks were swelled out in an unseemly manner, threw
aside the flute in her disgust, and Marsyas finding it, learned to play
on it so skilfully, that he challenged Apollo to a trial of proficiency.
Hyginus, in his 165th Fable, says that Marsyas was the son of Œagrius,
and not Hyagnis; perhaps, however, this is a corrupt reading. 210 VI. 412-423 FABLE V. Tereus , king of Thrace, having married
Progne, the daughter of Pandion, king of Athens, falls in love with her
sister Philomela, whom he ravishes, and then, having cut out her tongue,
he shuts her up in a strong place in a forest, to prevent a discovery.
The unfortunate Philomela finds means to acquaint her sister with her
misfortunes; for, weaving her story on a piece of cloth, she sends it to
Progne by the hands of one of her keepers. The neighboring princes met
together; and the cities that were near, entreated their kings to go to
console Pelops, namely , Argos and Sparta, and the Pelopean
Mycenæ, and Calydon, 51 not yet odious to the stern 235 VI. 416-432 Diana, and fierce Orchomeneus, and Corinth famous for its brass, 52 and
fertile Messene, and Patræ, and humble Cleonæ, 53 and the Neleian
Pylos, and Trœzen not yet named from Pittheus; 54 and other cities
which are enclosed by the Isthmus between the two seas, and those which,
situated beyond, are seen from the Isthmus between the two seas. Who
could have believed it? You, Athens, alone omitted it. A war
prevented this act of humanity; and barbarous troops 55 211 VI. 423-451 brought thither by sea, were alarming the Mopsopian walls. The
Thracian Tereus had routed these by his auxiliary forces, and by his
conquest had acquired an illustrious name. Him, powerful both in riches
and men, and, as it happened, deriving his descent from the mighty
Gradivus, Pandion united to himself, by the marriage of his
daughter Progne. Neither Juno, the guardian of marriage rites, nor yet Hymeneus, nor
the Graces, 56 attended those nuptials. On that occasion , the
Furies brandished torches, snatched from the funeral pile. The Furies
prepared the nuptial couch, and the ill-boding owl hovered over 236 VI. 432-460 the abode, and sat on the roof of the bridal chamber. With these omens
were Progne and Tereus wedded; with these omens were they made parents.
Thrace, indeed, congratulated them, and they themselves returned thanks
to the Gods, and they commanded the day, upon which the daughter of
Pandion was given to the renowned prince, and that upon which Itys was
born, to be considered as festivals. So much does our true interest lie
concealed from us . Now Titan had drawn the seasons of the
repeated year through five autumns, when Progne, in gentle accents, said
to her husband, “If I have any influence with thee , either send
me to see my sister, or let my sister come hither. Thou shalt promise
thy father-in-law that she shall return in a short time. As good as a
mighty God wilt thou be to me, if thou shalt allow me to see my
sister.” He thereupon ordered ships to be launched; 57 and with sails
and oars he entered the Cecropian harbor, and landed upon the shores of
the Piræus. 58 As soon as ever an opportunity was given of addressing his father-in-law, and right hand was joined to right
hand, with evil omen their discourse began. He had commenced to relate
the occasion of his coming, and the request of his wife, and to
promise a speedy return for Philomela, if sent. When lo!
Philomela comes, richly adorned 212 VI. 451-489 in costly apparel; richer by far in her charms; such as we hear of the Naiads and Dryads as they haunt the middle of the
forests, if you were only to give them the like ornaments and dress.
Tereus was inflamed upon seeing the virgin, no otherwise than if one
were to put fire beneath the whitening ears of corn, or were to burn
leaves and dry grass laid up in stacks. Her beauty, indeed, is
worthy of love ; but inbred lust, as well, urges him on, and the
people in those regions are naturally much inclined to
lustfulness. He burns, both by his own frailty and that of his nation.
He has a desire 237 VI. 461-492 to corrupt the care of her attendants, and the fidelity of her nurse,
and besides , to tempt herself with large presents, and to spend
his whole kingdom in so doing ; or else, to seize her, and, when
seized, to secure her by a cruel war. And there is nothing which, being
seized by an unbridled passion, he may not dare; nor does his breast
contain the internal flame. And now he ill bears with delay; and with
eager mouth returns to urge the request of Progne, and under it
he pleads his own wishes; passion makes him eloquent. As oft as he
presses beyond what is becoming, he pretends that Progne has thus desired. He
adds tears as well, as though she had enjoined them too. O ye Gods
above, how much of dark night do the breasts of mortals contain! Through
his very attempt at villany, Tereus is thought to be affectionate, and
from his crime does he gather praise. And how is it, too, that Philomela desires the same thing? and fondly
embracing the shoulders of her father with her arms, she begs, even by
her own safety (and against it too), that she may visit her sister.
Tereus views her, and, while viewing her, is embracing her beforehand in
imagination; and, as he beholds her kisses, and her arms around her
father’s neck, he receives them all as incentives, and fuel, and the
food of his furious passion; and, as often as she embraces her father,
he could wish to be that father, and, even then, he would have
been not the less impious. The father is overcome by the entreaties of
them both. She rejoices, and returns thanks to her parent, and, to her
misfortune, deems that the success of both, which will be the cause of
sorrow to them both. Now but little of his toil was remaining for
Phœbus, and his steeds were beating with their feet the descending track
of Olympus; a regal banquet was set on the tables, and 213 VI. 489-521 wine in golden vessels ; after this, their bodies were given up to
gentle sleep. But the Odrysian king, 59 though he was withdrawn, still
burned for her; and, recalling her form, her movements, her hands,
fancies that which he has not yet seen, to be such as he wishes; and he 238 VI. 493-522 himself feeds his own flames, his anxiety preventing sleep. It was now day; and Pandion, grasping the right hand of his
son-in-law, about to depart, with tears bursting forth, recommended his
companion to his care . “I commit her, my dear son-in-law, to
thee, because reasons, grounded on affection, have compelled me, and
both my daughters have desired it, and thou as well, Tereus, hast
wished it; and I entreat thee, begging by thy honor, by thy breast thus allied to us, and by the Gods above, to protect her
with the love of a father; and do send back to me, as soon as possible,
this sweet comfort of my anxious old age, for all delay will be
tedious to me, and do thou, too, Philomela, if thou hast any affection
for me, return as soon as possible: ’tis enough that thy sister is so
far away.” Thus did he enjoin, and at the same time he gave
kisses to his daughter, and his affectionate tears fell amid his
instructions. He then demanded the right hands of them both, as a
pledge of their fidelity, and joined them together when given, and bade
them, with mindful lips, to salute for him his absent daughter and
grandson, and with difficulty 60 uttered the last farewell, his mouth
being filled with sobs; and he shuddered at the presages of his own
mind. But as soon as Philomela was put on board of the painted ship, and
the sea was urged by the oars, and the land was left behind, he
exclaimed, “I have gained my point; the object of my desires is
borne along with me.” The barbarian exults, too, and with difficulty
defers his joy in his intention, and turns not his eyes anywhere away
from her. No otherwise than when the ravenous bird of Jupiter, with
crooked talons, has placed a hare in his lofty nest; there is no escape
for the captive; the plunderer keeps his eye on his prey. And now the
voyage is ended, and now they have gone forth from the wearied ship,
upon his own shore; when the king drags the daughter of Pandion into a
lofty dwelling, concealed in an ancient wood, 214 VI. 522-559 and there he shuts her up, pale and trembling, and dreading everything, 239 VI. 523-555 and now with tears inquiring where her sister is; and confessing his
baseness, he masters by force her a maiden, and but one, while she often
vainly calls on her father, often on her sister, and on the great Gods
above all. She trembles like a frightened lamb, which, wounded, being
snatched from the mouth of a hoary wolf, does not as yet seem to itself
in safety; and as a dove, its feathers soaked with its own blood, still
trembles, and dreads the ravening talons wherein it has been lately held. But soon, when consciousness returned,
tearing her dishevelled hair like one mourning, and beating her arms in
lamentation, stretching out her hands, she said, “Oh, barbarous wretch , for thy dreadful deeds; oh, cruel monster ! have
neither the requests of my father, with his affectionate tears, moved
thee, nor a regard for my sister, nor my virgin state, nor the laws of
marriage? Thou hast confounded all. I am become the supplanter of
my sister; thou, the husband of both of us. This punishment was not my
due. Why dost thou not take away this life, that no villany, perfidious wretch , may remain unperpetrated by thee? and would that
thou hadst done it before thy criminal embraces! then I might
have had a shade void of all crime. Yet, if the Gods above behold
these things, if the majesty of the Gods be anything; if, with myself,
all things are not come to ruin; one time or other thou shalt give me
satisfaction. I myself, having cast shame aside, will declare thy
deeds. If opportunity is granted me, I will come among the people;
if I shall be kept imprisoned in the woods, I will fill the woods,
and will move the conscious rocks. Let Heaven hear these things, and the
Gods, if there are any in it.” After the wrath of the cruel tyrant was aroused by such words, and
his fear was not less than it, urged on by either cause, he drew the
sword, with which he was girt, from the sheath, and seizing her by the
hair, her arms being bent behind her back, he compelled her to submit to
chains. Philomela was preparing her throat, and, on seeing the sword,
had conceived hopes of her death. He cut away, with his cruel weapon,
her tongue seized with pincers, while giving vent to her indignation, 240 VI. 555-585 and constantly calling on the name of her father, and struggling to
speak. The extreme root of the tongue still quivers. The
tongue itself lies, and faintly murmurs, quivering upon the black
earth; and as the tail of a mangled snake is 215 VI. 559-586 wont to writhe about, so does it throb, and, as it dies, seeks
the feet of its owner. It is said, too, that often after this crime
(I could hardly dare believe it) he satisfied his lust upon her
mutilated body. He has the effrontery, after such deeds, to return to Progne, who, on
seeing her husband, inquires for her sister; but he heaves feigned
sighs, and tells a fictitious story of her death; and his tears procure
him credit. Progne tears from her shoulders her robes, shining with
broad gold, and puts on black garments, and erects an honorary
sepulchre, and offers expiation to an imaginary shade; and laments the
death of a sister not thus to be lamented. The God Apollo , the year being completed, had run through the
twice six signs of the Zodiac . What can Philomela do?
A guard prevents her flight; the walls of the house are hard, built
of solid stone: her speechless mouth is deprived of the means of
discovering the crime. But in grief there is extreme ingenuity, and
inventive skill arises in misfortunes. She skilfully suspends the warp
in a web of Barbarian design, 61 and interweaves purple marks with
white, as a mode of discovering the villany of Tereus ; and
delivers it, when finished, to one of her attendants , and begs
her, by signs, to carry it to her mistress. As desired, she carries it
to Progne, and does not know what she is delivering in it. The wife of
the savage tyrant unfolds the web, and reads the mournful tale 62 of her
sister, and (wondrous that she can be so!) she is silent. ’Tis grief
that stops her utterance, and words sufficiently indignant fail her
tongue, in want of them; nor is there room for weeping. But she rushes
onward, about 241 VI. 586-596 to confound both right and wrong, and is wholly occupied in the
contrivance of revenge. EXPLANATION. The gravest authors among the ancients, such as Strabo and Pausanias,
speaking of this tragical story, agree that the narrative, divested of
its poetical ornaments, is strictly conformable to truth; though, of
course, the sequel bears evident marks of embellishment either by the
fancy of the Poet, or the superstition of the vulgar. 216 VI. 587-604 FABLE VI. Progne delivers her sister Philomela
from captivity, and brings her to the court of Tereus, where she
revolves in her mind her different projects of revenge. Her son Itys, in
the meantime, comes into her apartment, and is murdered by his mother
and aunt. Progne afterwards serves him up at a feast, which she prepares
for her husband; on which, being obliged to fly from the fury of the
enraged king, she is changed into a swallow, Philomela into a
nightingale, and Tereus himself into a lapwing. It is now the time 63 when the
Sithonian 64 matrons are wont to celebrate the triennial festival
of Bacchus. Night is conscious of their rites; by night Rhodope resounds
with the tinklings of the shrill cymbal. By night the queen goes out of
her house, and is arrayed according to the rites of the God, and carries
the arms of the frantic solemnity. Her head is covered with vine leaves;
from her left side hang down the skins of a deer; 65 upon her shoulder
rests a light spear. Then the terrible Progne rushing through the
woods, a multitude of her followers attending her, and agitated by
the fury of her resentment, pretends, Bacchus, that it is inspired by thee. 242 VI. 596-620 She comes at length to the lonely dwelling, and howls aloud, and
cries “Evoë!” and breaks open the gates, and seizes her sister, and puts
upon her, so seized, the badges of Bacchus, and conceals her
countenance under the foliage of ivy; and dragging her along, full of
amazement, leads her within her threshold. When Philomela perceives that
she has arrived at that accursed house, 66 the wretched woman shudders,
and paleness spreads over her whole face. Progne having now got a fitting place for so doing , takes away the symbols of the
rites, 67 and unveils the blushing face of her wretched sister; 217 VI. 605-641 and holds her in her embraces. But she, on the other hand, cannot endure
to lift up her eyes; seeming to herself the supplanter of her sister,
and fixing her looks on the ground, her hand is in the place of voice to
her, as she desires to swear and to call the Gods to witness that this
disgrace has been brought upon her by violence. Progne burns with
rage , and contains not her anger; and checking the grief of her
sister, she says, “We must not act in this matter with tears, but with
the sword, and even with anything, if such thou hast, that
can possibly outdo the sword. I have, sister, prepared myself for
every crime! Either, when I shall have set fire to the royal palace with
torches, I will throw the artful Tereus into the midst of the
flames, or with the steel will I cut away his tongue or his eyes, or the
members that have deprived thee of thy chastity, or by a thousand wounds
will I expel his guilty soul from his body . Something tremendous
am I prepared for; what it is, I am still in doubt.” While Progne was uttering such expressions, Itys came to his mother.
By him she was put in mind of what she might do; and looking at him with
vengeful eyes, she said, “Ah! how like thou art to thy father!” And
saying no more, she prepared for a horrible deed, and burned with silent
rage. Yet when her son came 243 VI. 620-652 to her, and saluted his mother and drew her neck towards him with
his little arms, and added kisses mingled with childish endearments, the
mother, in truth, was moved, and her anger abated, and her eyes, in
spite of her, became wet with tears thus forced from her .
But soon as she found the mother in her shrinking from excess of
affection, from him again did she turn towards the features of her
sister; and looking at them both by turns, she said, “Why does the one
employ endearments, while the other is silent with her tongue
torn from her? Why does she not call her sister, whom he calls mother?
Consider to what kind of husband thou art married, daughter of Pandion.
Thou dost grow degenerate. Tenderness in the wife of Tereus is
criminality.” No more delay is there ; she drags Itys
along, just as the tigress of the banks of the Ganges does the
suckling offspring of the hind, through the shady forests. And when they
are come to a remote part of the lofty house, Progne strikes 68 him with
the sword, 218 VI. 641-669 extending his hands, and as he beholds his fate, crying now “Alas!” and
now “My mother!” and clinging to her neck, where his breast joins his
side; nor does she turn away her face. Even one wound alone is
sufficient for his death; Philomela cuts his throat with the sword; and
they mangle his limbs, still quivering and retaining somewhat of life.
Part of them boils, 69 in the hollow cauldrons; part hisses on spits; the
inmost recesses stream with gore. His wife sets Tereus, in his
unconsciousness, before this banquet; and falsely pretending rites after
the manner of her country, at which it is allowed one man only to be
present, she removes his attendants and servants. Tereus himself,
sitting aloft on the throne of his forefathers, eats and heaps his own
entrails into his own stomach. And so great is the blindness of his
mind, that he says, “Send for Itys.” Progne is unable to 244 VI. 653-676 conceal her cruel joy; and now, desirous to be the discoverer of her
having murdered him, she says, “Thou hast within thee , that for
which thou art asking.” He looks around, and inquires where he is; as he
inquires, and calls him again, Philomela springs forth, just as she is,
with her hair disordered by the infernal murder, and throws the bloody
head of Itys in the face of his father; nor at any time has she more
longed to be able to speak, and to testify her joy by words such as are
deserved. The Thracian pushes from him the table with a loud cry, and summons
the Viperous sisters 70 from the Stygian valley; and at one moment he
desires, if he only can, by opening his breast to discharge
thence the horrid repast, and the half-digested entrails. And then he
weeps, and pronounces himself the wretched sepulchre of his own son; and
then he follows the daughters of Pandion with his drawn sword. You would
have thought the bodies of the Cecropian 71 Nymphs were supported
by wings; and they were supported by wings. The one of them makes
for the woods, the other takes her 219 VI. 669-676 place beneath the roofs of houses . Nor even as yet have
the marks of murder withdrawn from her breast; and her feathers are still stained with blood. He, made swift by his grief, and his
desire for revenge, is turned into a bird, upon whose head stands a
crested plume ; a prolonged bill projects in place of the
long spear. The name of the bird is ‘epops’ [ lapwing ]; its face
appears to be armed. This affliction dispatched Pandion to the shades of
Tartarus before his day, and the late period of protracted old age. EXPLANATION. By the symbolical changes of Philomela, Progne, and Tereus, those who
framed this termination of the story intended to depict the different
characters of the persons whose actions are there 245 VI. 677 represented. As the lapwing delights in filth and impurity, the ancients
thereby portrayed the unscrupulous character of Tereus; and,
as the flight of that bird is but slow, it shows that he was not able to
overtake his wife and her sister. The nightingale, concealed in the
woods and thickets, seems there to be concealing her misfortunes and
sorrows; and the swallow, which frequents the abodes of man, shows the
restlessness of Progne, who seeks in vain for her son, whom, in her
frantic fit, she has so barbarously murdered. Anacreon and Apollodorus, however, reverse the story, saying that
Philomela was changed into a swallow, and Progne into a nightingale.
This event is said by some writers to have happened not in Thrace, but
at Daulis, a town of Phocis, where Tereus is supposed to have gone
to settle. Pausanias tells us, that the tomb of Tereus was to be seen
near Athens, so that it is probable that he died at a distance from
Thrace, his native country. Homer alludes to the story of Philomela in
somewhat different terms; speaking of the grounds of the grief of
Penelope, he says, that ‘she made her complaints to be heard like the
inconsolable Philomela, the daughter of Pandarus, always hidden among
the leaves and branches of trees. When the Spring arrives, she makes her
voice echo through the woods, and laments her dear Itylus, whom she
killed by an unhappy mistake; varying, in her continued plaints, the
mournful melody of her notes.’ By this, Homer seems to have known
nothing of Tereus or of Progne, and to have followed a tradition, which
was to the following effect:—Pandarus had three daughters, Ædon,
Mecrope, and Cleothera. Ædon, the eldest, was married to Zethus, the
brother of Amphion, by whom she had one son, who was named Itylus.
Envying the more numerous family of Niobe, her sister-in-law, she
resolved to despatch the eldest of her nephews; and, as her son was
brought up with his cousin, and was his bedfellow, she bade him change
his place in the bed, on the night on which she intended to commit the
crime. Itylus forgot her commands, and consequently his mother killed
him by mistake for her nephew. 220 VI. 677-700 FABLE VII. Boreas , not obtaining the consent of
Erectheus, king of Athens, for the marriage of his daughter, Orithyïa,
takes that princess in his arms, and carries her away into Thrace. By
her he has two sons, Calaïs and Zethes, who have wings, like their
father, and afterwards embark with Jason in search of the Golden
Fleece. Erectheus 72 received the sceptre
of that country, and 246 VI. 678-707 the government of the state; it is a matter of doubt whether he was more
powerful through his justice, or by his mighty arms. He had, indeed,
begotten four sons, and as many of the female sex: but the beauty of two of them was equal. Of these, Cephalus, 73 the son of Æolus, was
blessed with thee, Procris, for his wife; Tereus and the Thracians were
an obstacle to Boreas; and long was that God without his
much-loved Orithyïa, while he was entreating, and choosing rather to use
prayers than force. But when nothing was effected by blandishments,
terrible with that rage which is his wont, and but too natural with that
wind, he said, “And this is deservedly done ; for why did I
relinquish my own weapons, my violence, my strength, my anger, and my
threatening spirit, and turn to prayers, the employment of which ill
becomes me? Violence is suitable for me; by violence do I dispel the
lowering clouds, by violence do I arouse the seas, and overthrow the
knotted oaks, and harden the snow, and beat the earth with hail.
I too, when I have met with my brothers in the open air (for that
is peculiarly my field), struggle with efforts so great, that the
intermediate sky thunders again with our onset, and fires flash, struck
forth from the hollow clouds. I too, when I have descended into the
hollow recesses of the earth, and in my rage have placed my back against
its lowest depths, disturb the shades below, and the whole globe with
earthquakes. By 221 VI. 700-721 these means should I have sought this alliance; and Erectheus ought not
to have been entreated to be my father-in-law, but made so by
force.” Boreas, having said these words, or some not less high-sounding than
these, shakes his wings, by the motion of which all the earth is fanned,
and the wide sea becomes ruffled; and the lover, drawing his dusty
mantle over the high tops of mountains , sweeps the ground, and,
wrapt in darkness, embraces with his tawny wings Orithyïa, as she
trembles with fear. As she flies, his 247 VI. 708-721 flame, being agitated, burns more fiercely. Nor does the ravisher check
the reins of his airy course, before he reaches the people and the walls
of the Ciconians. 74 There, too, is the Actæan damsel made the wife
of the cold sovereign, and afterwards a mother, bringing forth
twins at a birth, who have the wings of their father, the rest like their mother. Yet they say that these wings were not
produced together with their bodies; and while their long beard, with
its yellow hair, was away, the boys Calaïs and Zethes were without
feathers. But soon after, at once wings began to enclose both
their sides, after the manner of birds, and at once their cheeks began to grow yellow with down . When, therefore, the
boyish season of youth was passed, they sought, 75 with the Minyæ, along
the sea before unmoved, 76 in the first ship that
existed , the fleece that glittered with shining hair of
gold . EXPLANATION. Plato tells us that the story of the rape of Orithyïa is but an
allegory, which signifies that, by accident, she was blown by the wind
into the sea, where she was drowned. Apollodorus and Pausanias, however,
assert that this story is based on historical facts, and that Boreas,
king of Thrace, seized Orithyïa, the daughter of Erectheus, king of
Athens, and sister of Procris, as she was passing the river Ilissus, and
carried her into his dominions, where she became the mother of twins,
Calaïs and Zethes. In the Argonautic expedition, these chiefs delivered
Phineus, the king of Bithynia, from the persecution of the Harpies,
which were in the habit of snatching away the victuals served up at his
table. 1. Colophon. ]—Ver. 8. Colophon was an opulent city of Lydia,
famous for an oracle of Apollo there. 2. Phocæan. ]—Ver. 9. Phocæa was a city of Æolia, in Ionia, on
the shores of the Mediterranean, famous for its purple dye. 3. Purple. ]—Ver. 9. ‘Murex’ was a shell-fish, now called ‘the
purples,’ the juices of which were much used by the ancients for dyeing
a deep purple color. The most valuable kinds were found near Tyre and
Phocæa, mentioned in the text. 4. Hypæpæ. ]—Ver. 13. This was a little town of Lydia, near the
banks of the river Cayster. It was situate on the descent of Mount
Tymolus, or Tmolus, famed for its wines and saffron. 5. Pactolus. ]—Ver. 16. This was a river of Lydia, which was
said to have sands of gold. 6. Mygdonian. ]—Ver. 45. Mygdonia was a small territory of
Phrygia, bordering upon Lydia, and colonized by a people from Thrace.
Probably these persons had come from the neighboring country, to see the
exquisite works of Arachne. As the Poet tells us, many were present when
the Goddess discovered herself, and professed their respect and
veneration, while Arachne alone remained unmoved. 7. Brazen vessel. ]—Ver. 60. It seems that brazen cauldrons
were used for the purposes of dyeing, in preference to those of
iron. 8. Rock of Mars. ]—Ver. 70. This was the spot called
Areiopagus, which was said to have received its name from the trial
there of Mars, when he was accused by Neptune of having slain his son
Halirrothius. 9. Twice six. ]—Ver. 72. These were the ‘Dii consentes,’
mentioned before, in the note to Book i., l. 172. They are thus
enumerated in an Elegiac couplet, more consistent with the rules of
prosody than the two lines there quoted:— ‘Vulcanus, Mars, Sol, Neptunus, Jupiter, Hermes, Vesta, Diana, Ceres, Juno, Minerva, Venus.’ 10. To be springing forth. ]—Ver. 76-7. Clarke renders
‘facit—e vulnere saxi Exsiluisse ferum,’ ‘she makes a wild horse
bounce out of the opening in the rock.’ 11. Pygmæan matron. ]—Ver. 90. According to Ælian, the name of
this queen of the Pigmies was Gerane, while other writers call her
Pygas. She was worshipped by her subjects as a Goddess, which raised her
to such a degree of conceit, that she despised the worship of the
Deities, especially of Juno and Diana, on which in their indignation,
they changed her into a crane, the most active enemy of the Pygmies.
These people were dwarfs, living either in India, Arabia, or Thrace, and
they were said not to exceed a cubit in height. 12. Antigone. ]—Ver. 93. She was the daughter of Laomedon, king
of Troy, and was remarkable for the extreme beauty of her hair. Proud of
this, she used to boast that she resembled Juno; on which the Goddess,
offended at her presumption, changed her hair into serpents. In
compassion, the Deities afterwards transformed her into a stork. 13. Cinyras. ]—Ver. 98. Cinyras had several daughters (besides
Myrrha), remarkable for their extreme beauty. Growing insolent upon the
strength of their good looks, and pretending to surpass even Juno
herself in beauty, they incurred the resentment of that Goddess, who
changed them into the steps of a temple, and transformed their father
into a stone, as he was embracing the steps. 14. Asterie. ]—Ver. 108. She was the daughter of Cæus, the
Titan, and of Phœbe, and was ravished by Jupiter under the form of an
eagle. She was the wife of Perses, and the mother of Hecate. Flying from
the wrath of Jupiter, she was first changed by him into a quail; and
afterwards into a stone. 15. Antiope. ]—Ver. 110. Antiope was the daughter of Nycteus,
a king of Bœotia. Being seduced by Jupiter under the form of a
Satyr, she bore two sons, Zethus and Amphion. On being insulted by
Dirce, she was seized with madness, and was cured by Phocus, whom she is
said to have afterwards married. 16. Tirynthian. ]—Ver. 112. Tirynthus was a city near Argos,
where Hercules was born and educated, and from which place his mother,
Alcmene, derived her present appellation. 17. Daughter of Asopus. ]—Ver. 113. Jupiter changed himself into
fire, or, according to some, into an eagle, to seduce Ægina, the
daughter of Asopus, king of Bœotia. By her he was the father of
Æacus. 18. Mnemosyne. ]—Ver. 114. This Nymph, as already mentioned,
became the mother of the Nine Muses, having been seduced by Jupiter. 19. Deois. ]—Ver. 114. Proserpine was called Deois, or Dêous Δηοῦς κόρη , from her
mother Ceres, who was called Δηὼ by the Greeks, from the verb δήω , ‘to find;’ because as it was said, when
seeking for her daughter, the universal answer of those who wished her
success in her search, was, δήεις , ‘You will find her.’ 20. Virgin daughter. ]—Ver. 116. This was Canace, or Arne, the
daughter of Æolus, whom Neptune seduced under the form of a bull. 21. Enipeus. ]—Ver. 116. Under the form of Enipeus, a river
of Thessaly, Neptune committed violence upon Iphimedeia, the wife of the
giant Aloëus, and by her was the father of the giants Otus and
Ephialtes. 22. Bisaltis. ]—Ver. 117. Theophane was the daughter of
Bisaltis. Changing her into a sheep, and himself into a ram, Neptune
begot the Ram with the golden fleece, that bore Phryxus to Colchis. 23. Experienced. ]—Ver. 119. ‘Te sensit,’ repeated twice in this
line, Clarke translates, not in a very elegant manner, ‘had a bout with
thee,’ and ‘had a touch from thee.’ By Neptune, Ceres became the mother
of the horse Arion; or, according to some, of a daughter, whose name it
was not deemed lawful to mention. 24. Thee the mother. ]—Ver. 119. This was Medusa, who, according
to some, was the mother of the horse Pegasus, by Neptune, though it is
more generally said that it sprang from her blood, when she was slain by
Perseus. 25. Melantho. ]—Ver. 120. Melantho was the daughter either of
Proteus, or of Deucalion, and was the mother of Delphus, by Neptune. 26. Isse. ]—Ver. 124. She was a native of either Lesbos, or
Eubœa. Her father, Macareus, was the son of Jupiter and Cyrene. 27. Erigone. ]—Ver. 125. She was the daughter of Icarus, and was
placed among the Constellations. 28. How Saturn. ]—Ver. 126. By Phillyra, Saturn was the father
of the Centaur Chiron. We may here remark, that Arachne was not very
complimentary to the Gods, in the choice of her subjects; probably it
was not her intention or wish to be so. 29. Wicked one. ]—Ver. 136. Clarke translates ‘improba,’ ‘thou
wicked jade.’ 30. An Hecatean Herb. ]—Ver. 139. This was aconite, or
wolfsbane, said to have been discovered by Hecate, the mother of Medea.
She was the first who sought after, and taught the properties of
poisonous herbs. Some accounts say, that the aconite was produced from
the foam of Cerberus, when dragged by Hercules from the infernal
regions. 31. Had known her. ]—Ver. 148. This was the more likely, as
Tantalus, the father of Niobe, was king of both Phrygia and Lydia. 32. Sipylus. ]—Ver. 149. This was the name of both a city and a
mountain of Lydia. 33. Go all of you. ]—Ver. 159. Clarke renders the words
‘Ismenides, ite frequentes,’ ‘Go, ye Theban ladies in general.’ 34. Sister of the Pleiades. ]—Ver. 174. Taygete, one of the
Pleiades, was the mother of Niobe. 35. As my father-in-law. ]—Ver. 176. Because Jupiter was the
father of her husband, Amphion. 36. Seven daughters. ]—Ver. 182. Tzetzes enumerates fourteen
daughters of Niobe, and gives their names. 37. When in travail. ]—Ver. 187. She alludes to the occasion on
which Latona fled from the serpent Python, which Juno, in her jealousy,
had sent against her; and when Delos, which had hitherto been a floating
island, became immovable, for the convenience of Latona, in labor with
Apollo and Diana. That island was said to have received its name from
the Greek, δῆλος ,
‘manifest,’ or ‘appearing,’ from having risen to the surface of the sea
on that occasion. 38. Like her father’s. ]—Ver. 213. Latona alludes to one of the
crimes of Tantalus, the father of Niobe, who was accused of having
indiscreetly divulged the secrets of the Gods. 39. Gives rein. ]—Ver. 230. This was done with the intention of
making his escape. 40. Glowing with oil. ]—Ver. 241. Clarke renders this line,
‘Were gone to the juvenile work of neat wrestling.’ It would be hard to
say what ‘neat’ wrestling is. He seems not to have known, that the
‘Palæstra’ was called ‘nitida,’ as shining with the oil which the
wrestlers used for making their limbs supple, and the more difficult for
their antagonist to grasp. Juvenal gives the epithet ‘ceromaticum’ to
the neck of the athlete, or wrestler, which word means ‘rubbed with
wrestler’s oil.’ 41. Now had they brought. ]—Ver. 243-4. Clarke thus translates
‘Et jam contulerant arcto luctantia nexu Pectora pectoribus;’ ‘And now
they had clapped breast to breast, struggling in a close hug.’ 42. I have received my death-blow. ]—Ver. 283. ‘Efferor’
literally means, ‘I am carried out.’ ‘Effero’ was the term used to
signify the carrying of the body out of the city walls, for the purposes
of burial. 43. Before the biers. ]—Ver. 289. The body of the deceased
person was in ancient times laid out on a bed of the ordinary kind, with
a pillow for supporting the head and back; among the Romans, it was
placed in the vestibule of the house, with its feet towards the door,
and was dressed in the best robe which the deceased had worn when alive.
Among the better classes, the body was borne to the place of burial, or
the funeral pile, on a couch, which was called ‘feretrum,’ or ‘capulus.’
This was sometimes made of ivory, and covered with gold and purple. 44. Top of a mountain. ]—Ver. 311. This was Mount Sipylus, in
Bœotia, which, as we learn from Pausanias, had on its summit a rock,
which, at a distance, strongly resembled a female in an attitude of
sorrow. This resemblance is said to exist even at the present day. 45. The Chimæra. ]—Ver. 339. The Chimæra, according to the
poets, was a monster having the head of a lion, the body of a goat, and
the tail of a dragon. It seems, however, that it was nothing more than a
volcanic mountain of Lycia, in Asia Minor, whence there were occasional
eruptions of flame. The top of it was frequented by lions; the middle
afforded plentiful pasture for goats; and towards the bottom, being
rocky, and full of caverns, it was infested by vast numbers of serpents,
that harbored there. 46. Beheld a lake. ]—Ver. 343. Probus, in his Commentary on the
Second Book of the Georgics, says that the name of the spring was Mela,
and that of the shepherd who so churlishly repulsed Latona, was Neocles.
Antoninus Liberalis says, that the name of the stream was Melites, and
that Latona required the water for the purpose of bathing her children.
He further tells us, that on being repulsed, she carried her children to
the river Xanthus, and returning thence, hurled stones at the peasants,
and changed them into frogs. 47. Beneath the water. ]—Ver. 376. Some commentators are so
fanciful as to say, that the repetition of the words ‘sub aqua,’ in the
line ‘Quamvis sint sub aquâ, sub aquâ, maledicere tentant,’ not
inelegantly [non ineleganter] expresses the croaking noise of the frogs.
A man’s fancy must, indeed, be exuberant to find any such
resemblance; more so, indeed, than that of Aristophanes, who makes his
frogs say, by way of chorus, ‘ brekekekekex koäx koäx.’ Possibly,
however, that might have been the Attic dialect among frogs. 48. The Satyr. ]—Ver. 382. Herodotus tells this story of the
Satyr Marsyas, under the name of Silenus. Fulgentius informs us, that in
paintings, Marsyas was represented with the tail of a pig. 49. His skin was stript. ]—Ver. 387. Apollo fastened him to a
pine-tree, or, according to Pliny the Elder, a plane-tree, which
was to be seen even in his day. The skin was afterwards suspended by
Apollo in the city of Celenæ. Hyginus says, that Apollo hewed Marsyas to
pieces. The description here of the flaying is, perhaps, very natural;
but it is all the more disgusting for being so. A commentator
justly says, that it might suit a Roman, whose eyes were familiar with
bloodshed, much better than the taste of the reader of modern times. 50. Olympus. ]—Ver. 393. He was a Satyr, the brother and pupil
of Marsyas. Pausanias describes a picture, painted by Polygnotus, in
which Olympus was represented as sitting by Marsyas, clad as a youth,
and learning to play on the flute. Euripides, in the Iphigenia in Aulis
(l. 576) says that Olympus discovered some new measures for the ‘tibia,’
or flute. From Hyginus we learn, that Apollo delivered to him the body
of Marsyas for burial. 51. Calydon. ]—Ver. 415. This was a city of Ætolia, which
derived its name from Calydon, the son of Endymion. Diana, being
incensed against Œneus, its king, because he omitted her when offering
the first fruits to the other Deities, sent an immense boar to ravage
its fields, which was slain by Meleager. Ovid recounts these
circumstances in the eighth book of the Metamorphoses. Argos, Sparta,
and Mycenæ, are also included in one line, by Homer, as having been
under the particular tutelage of Juno. 52. Famous for its brass. ]—Ver. 416. According to some writers,
the Corinthian brass became famous after the fall of Corinth, when it
was taken and burnt by the Consul Mummius. On that occasion, they say,
that from the immense number of statues melted in the conflagration,
a stream of metal poured through the streets, consisting of melted
gold, silver, and copper; in which, of course, the latter would be
predominant. If that was the ground on which the Corinthian brass was so
much commended, Ovid is here guilty of an anachronism. 53. Cleonæ. ]—Ver. 417. This was a little town, situate between
Argos and Corinth. It is called ‘humilis,’ not from its situation, but
from the small number of its inhabitants. Patræ was a city of
Achaia. 54. Pittheus. ]—Ver. 418. He was the uncle of Theseus; and was
(after the time here mentioned) the king of Trœzen, in Peloponnesus. 55. Barbarous troops. ]—Ver. 423. Some suggest that it is here
meant that Attica was invaded by the Amazons at this time; and they rely
on a passage of Justin in support of the position. The story is,
however, very improbable. 56. The Graces. ]—Ver. 429. The Graces, who were the attendants
of Venus, were three in number, Aglaia, Thalia, and Euphrosyne. 57. To be launched. ]—Ver. 445. The ships were launched into the
sea by means of rollers placed beneath them, from which circumstance
they were said ‘deduci,’ ‘to be led down.’ 58. Shores of the Piræus. ]—Ver. 446. The Piræus was the arsenal
and the harbor of the Athenians, and owed its magnificence to the vast
conceptions of Themistocles. 59. The Odrysian king. ]—Ver. 490. Tereus is thus called, from
the Odrysæ, a people of Thrace. 60. With difficulty. ]—Ver. 510. Clarke translates ‘vix,’ ‘with
much ado.’ 61. Barbarian design. ]—Ver. 576. Probably of a Phrygian
design. 62. The mournful tale. ]—Ver. 582. This line is translated by
Clarke, ‘And reads the miserable ditty of her sister.’ 63. Now the time. ]—Ver. 587. This was the festival of Bacchus,
before mentioned as being celebrated every three years, in memory of his
Indian expedition. 64. Sithonian. ]—Ver. 588. Sithonia was a region of Thrace,
which lay between Mount Hæmus and the Euxine sea. The word, however, is
often used to signify the whole of Thrace. 65. Skins of a deer. ]—Ver. 593. These were the ‘nebrides,’ or
skins of fawns and deer, which the Bacchanals wore when celebrating the
orgies. The lance mentioned here was, no doubt, the thyrsus. 66. That accursed house. ]—Ver. 601. Clarke translates this
line, ‘As soon as Philomela perceived she had got into the wicked
rogue’s house.’ 67. Symbols of the rites. ]—Ver. 603. These were the ivy, the
deer-skins, and the thyrsus. 68. Progne strikes. ]—Ver. 641. ‘Ense ferit Progne’ is
translated by Clarke, ‘Progne strikes with the sword poor Itys.’ 69. Part of them boils. ]—Ver. 645-6. Clarke gives this comical
translation: ‘Then part of them bounces about in hollow kettles; part
hisses upon spits; the parlor runs down with gore.’ 70. Viperous sisters. ]—Ver. 662. Tereus invokes the Furies, who
are thus called from having their hair wreathed with serpents. Clarke
translates, ‘ingenti clamore,’ in line 661, ‘with a huge cry.’ 71. Cecropian. ]—Ver. 667. The Cecropian or Athenian Nymphs are
Progne and Philomela, the daughters of Pandion, king of Athens. 72. Erectheus. ]—Ver. 677. This personage really was king of
Athens before Pandion, the father of Progne and Philomela, and not after
him, as Ovid here states; at least, such is the account given by
Pausanias and Eusebius: the order of succession being Actæus, Cecrops,
Cranaüs, Amphictyon, Erecthonius, Pandion, Erectheus, Cecrops II.,
Pandion II., Ægeus, Theseus. 73. Cephalus. ]—Ver. 681. He was the son of Deioneus, and the
grandson of Æolus. According to some writers, he was the son of Mercury;
and in the Art of Love (Book iii. l. 725) he is called ‘Cyllenia proles.’
Strabo says that he was the son-in-law of Deioneus. His story is related
at length in the next Book. 74. The Ciconians. ]—Ver. 710. The Cicones were a people of
Thrace, living near Mount Ismarus, and the Bistonian lake. 75. They sought. ]—Ver. 720. This was the fleece of the ram that
carried Phryxus along the Hellespont to Colchis, which is mentioned
again in the next Book. 76. Before unmoved. ]—Ver. 721. This passage may mean that that
part of the sea had not been navigated before; though many of the poets
assert that the Argo was the first ship that was ever built. It is more
probable that it was the first vessel that was ever fitted out as a ship
of war. Supplementary Notes ( added by transcriber ) A. the stranger answered me in such words; ‘Young man... This
embedded single quote was apparently abandoned by the editor; each
double quote for the remainder of the Fable should be accompanied by a
single quote. B. after he had drawn his clothes from his shoulder towards his
breast . Ovid VI.404-405 “... umeroque suas a pectore [ or: ad
pectora]
postquam / deduxit [ or: diduxit] vestes ebur ostendisse
sinistro”. It is possible to construct a Latin variation that would
translate as “from his shoulders”, but editorial or typographic error is
a much likelier explanation. 248 222 BOOK THE SEVENTH. FABLE I. Jason , after having met with various
adventures, arrives with the Argonauts in Colchis, and demands the
Golden Fleece. Medea falls in love with Jason, and by the power of her
enchantments preserves him from the dangers he has to encounter in
obtaining it. He obtains the prize, and carrying off Medea, returns in
triumph to Thessaly. And now the Minyæ 1 were ploughing the
sea in the Pagasæan ship; 2 and Phineus prolonging a needy old age under
perpetual night, had been visited, and the youthful sons of the North
wind had driven the birds with the faces of virgins from before the mouth of the distressed old man; 3 and having suffered many things under
the famous Jason, had reached at length the rapid waters of the muddy
Phasis. And while they go to the king, and ask the fleece that once belonged
to Phryxus, and conditions are offered them, dreadful for the number of
mighty labors; in the meantime, the daughter of Æetes 4 conceives a
violent flame; and having long struggled against it , after she is
unable to conquer her frenzy by reason, she says: “In vain, Medea, dost
thou resist; some God, who, I know not, is opposing thee. It is a
wonder too, if it is not this, or at least something like this, which is
called ‘love.’ For why do the commands 249 VII. 15-44 of my father appear too rigid for me? and yet too rigid they are. Why 223 VII. 16-48 am I in dread, lest he whom I have seen but so lately, should
perish? What is the cause of alarm so great? Banish the flames conceived
in thy virgin breast, if thou canst, unhappy creature . If I
could, I would be more rational. But a new power draws me on,
against my will; and Cupid persuades one thing, reason another.
I see which is the more proper course , and I approve of it, while I follow the wrong one. Why, royal maiden, art thou burning
for a stranger, and why coveting the nuptial ties of a strange country?
This land, too, may give thee something which thou mayst love. Whether
he shall live, or whether die, is in the disposal of the Gods.
Yet he may survive; and that I may pray for, even without love. For what fault has Jason committed? Whom, but one of hard heart, would not
the youthful age of Jason affect? his descent too, and his valor?
Whom, though these other points were wanting, would not his beauty move?
at least, he has moved my breast. But unless I shall give him aid, he
will be breathed upon by the mouths of the bulls; and will engage with
his own kindred crops, an enemy sprung from the earth; or he will
be given as a cruel prey to the ravenous dragon. If I allow this, then I
will confess that I was born of a tigress; then, too , that I
carry steel and stone in my heart. Why do I not as well behold him
perish? Why not, too, profane my eyes by seeing it? Why do I not
stimulate the bulls against him, and the fierce sons of the earth, and
the never-sleeping dragon? May the Gods award better things. And yet
these things are not to be prayed for, but must be effected by myself.
Shall I then betray the kingdom of my father? and by my aid shall
some stranger, I know not who, be saved; that being delivered by my
means, he may spread his sails to the winds without me, and be the
husband of another; and I, Medea, be left for punishment? If he can
do this, and if he is capable of preferring another to me, let him
perish in his ingratitude. But not such is his countenance, not such
that nobleness of soul, that gracefulness of person, that I should fear
treachery, and forgetfulness 250 VII. 45-61 of what I deserve. Besides, he shall first pledge his faith, and I will
oblige the Gods to be witnesses of our compact. What then dost thou
dread, thus secure? Haste then , 5 and banish 224 VII. 48-66 all delay. Jason will ever be indebted to thee for his
preservation; thee will he unite to himself in the rites of marriage,
and throughout the Pelasgian cities 6 thou wilt be celebrated by crowds of
matrons, as the preserver of their sons . And shall I then, borne
away by the winds, leave my sister 7 and my brother, 8 and my father, and my
Gods, and my native soil? My father is cruel, forsooth; my country, too,
is barbarous; 9 my brother is still but an infant; the wishes of
my sister are in my favor. The greatest of the Gods is in possession of
me. I shall not be relinquishing anything great; I shall be
pursuing what is great; the credit of saving the youth of Greece, 10 acquaintance with a better country, and cities, whose fame is
flourishing even here, and the politeness and the arts of their
inhabitants; and the son of Æson, whom I could be ready to take in
exchange for all the things that the whole world contains; with
whom for my husband I shall both be 251 VII. 62-84 deemed dear to the Gods, and shall reach the stars with my head. Why say
that I know not what mountains 11 are reported to arise in the midst
of the waves, and that Charybdis, an enemy to ships, one while sucks in
the sea, at another discharges it; and how that Scylla, begirt with
furious dogs, is said to bark in the Sicilian deep? Yet holding him 225 VII. 66-94 whom I love, and clinging to the bosom of Jason, I shall be borne
over the wide seas; embracing him, naught will I dread; or if I fear
anything, for my husband alone will I fear. And dost thou, Medea, call
this a marriage, and dost thou give a plausible name to thy criminality?
Do but consider how great an offence thou art meditating, and, while still thou mayst, fly from guilt.” Thus she said, and before her eyes stood Virtue, Affection,
and Modesty; and now Cupid turned his vanquished back. She was going to
the ancient altars of Hecate, 12 the daughter of Perses, which a
shady grove and the recesses of a wood concealed. And now she was
resolved, and her passion being checked, had subsided; when she beheld
the son of Æson, and the extinguished flame revived. Her cheeks were
covered with blushes, and her whole face was suffused with a glow. As a
spark is wont to derive nourishment from the winds, which, but small
when it lay concealed beneath the ashes cast over it, is wont to
increase, and aroused, to rise again to its original strength, so her
love, now declining, which you would suppose was now growing languid,
when she beheld the youth, was rekindled with the appearance of him
before her eyes. And by chance, on that day, the son of Æson was more 252 VII. 85-110 beauteous than usual. You might forgive her loving him. She gazes; and
keeps her eyes fixed upon his countenance, as though but now seen for
the first time; and in her frenzy she thinks she does not behold the
face of a mortal; nor does she turn away from him. But when the stranger
began to speak, and seized her right hand, and begged her assistance
with a humble voice, and promised her marriage; she said, with tears
running down, “I see what I ought to do; and it will not be
ignorance of the truth, but love that beguiles me. By my agency thou
shalt be saved; when saved, grant what thou hast promised.” 226 VII. 94-120 He swears by the rites of the Goddess of the triple form, and the
Deity which is in that grove, and by the sire 13 of his future
father-in-law, who beholds all things, and by his own adventures, and by
dangers so great. Being believed by her , he immediately received
some enchanted herbs, and thoroughly learned the use of them, and went
away rejoicing to his abode. The next morning had now dispersed
the twinkling stars, when the people repaired to the sacred field
of Mavors, and ranged themselves on the hills. In the midst of the
assembly sat the king himself, arrayed in purple, and distinguished by a
sceptre of ivory. Behold! the brazen-footed bulls breathe forth flames 14 from their adamantine nostrils; and the grass touched by the vapors is
on fire. And as the forges filled with fire are wont to roar, or
when flints 15 dissolved in an earthen furnace receive intense heat
by the sprinkling of flowing water; so do their breasts rolling forth
the flames enclosed within, and their scorched throats, resound. 253 VII. 110-139 Yet the son of Æson goes forth to meet them. The fierce bulls turn their terrible features, and their horns pointed with iron, towards
his face as he advances, and with cloven hoofs they spurn the dusty
ground, and fill the place with lowings, that send forth clouds of
smoke. The Minyæ are frozen with horror. He comes up, and feels not the
flames breathed forth by them, so great is the power of the
incantations. He even strokes their hanging dewlaps with a bold right
hand, and, subjected to the yoke, he obliges them to draw the heavy
weight of a plough, and to turn up with the share the plain till
now unused to it. 16 The Colchians are astonished; the Minyæ fill the air with
their shouts, and give him fresh courage. Then in a brazen 227 VII. 120-155 helmet he takes the dragon’s teeth, 17 and strews them over the ploughed
up fields. The ground, impregnated beforehand with a potent drug,
softens the seed; and the teeth that were sown grow up, and become new
bodies. And as the infant receives the human form in the womb of the
mother, and is there formed in all its parts, and comes not forth into
the common air until at maturity, so when the figure of man is ripened
in the bowels of the pregnant earth, it arises in the fruitful plain;
and, what is still more surprising, it brandishes arms produced at the
same time. When the Pelasgians saw them preparing to hurl their spears
with sharp points at the head of the Hæmonian youth, they lowered their
countenances and their courage, quailing with fear. She, too,
became alarmed, who had rendered him secure; and when she saw the youth,
being but one, attacked by so many enemies, she turned pale, and
suddenly chilled with fear , sat down without blood in her
cheeks . And, lest the herbs that had been given by her, should avail
him but little, she repeats an auxiliary charm, and summons to her
aid her secret arts. He, hurling a heavy stone into the midst of his 254 VII. 140-158 enemies, turns the warfare, now averted from himself, upon themselves.
The Earth-born brothers perish by mutual wounds, and fall in civil
fight. The Greeks congratulate him, and caress the conqueror, and cling
to him in hearty embraces. And thou too, barbarian maiden, wouldst fain
have embraced him; ’twas modesty that opposed the design; otherwise thou
wouldst have embraced him; but regard for thy reputation restrained thee
from doing so. What thou mayst do, thou dost do ; thou rejoicest
with a silent affection, and thou givest thanks to thy charms, and to
the Gods, the authors of them. It still remains to lay asleep with herbs the watchful dragon,
who, distinguished by his crest and his three tongues, and terrible with
his hooked teeth, is the keeper of the Golden Fleece. After he has
sprinkled him with herbs of Lethæan juice, 18 and has thrice
repeated words that cause placid slumbers, which would even calm the boisterous ocean, and which would stop the rapid rivers,
sleep creeps upon the eyes 228 VII. 155-158 that were strangers to it, and the hero, the son of Æson, gains the
gold; and proud of the spoil and bearing with him the giver of the prize
as a second spoil, he arrives victorious, with his wife, at the port of
Iolcos. 19 EXPLANATION. To understand this story, one of the most famous in the early history of
Greece, we must go back to the origin of it, and examine the fictions
which the poets have mingled with the history of the expedition of the
Argonauts, one of the most remarkable events of the fabulous ages. Athamas, the son of Æolus, grandson of Hellen, and great-grandson of
Deucalion, having married Ino, the daughter of Cadmus, was obliged to
divorce her, on account of the madness with which she was attacked. He
afterwards married Nephele, by whom he had a son and daughter, Phryxus
and Helle; but on his taking his first wife again, she brought him two
sons, Learchus and Melicerta. Ino, hating the children of Nephele,
sought to destroy them. Phryxus being informed thereof, ordered a ship
to be privately prepared; and taking his father’s treasures, sailed with 255 his sister Helle, to seek a retreat in the court of Æetes, his kinsman.
Helle died on the voyage, but Phryxus arrived in Colchis, where he
dedicated the prow of his ship to Neptune, or Jupiter. He there married
Chalciope, by whom he had four sons, Argos, Phrontes, Molas, and
Cylindus. Some years after, Æetes caused him to be assassinated; and his
sons fleeing to the court of their grandfather, Athamas, were
shipwrecked on an island, where they remained until found there by
Jason, who took them back to their mother. Having mourned them as dead,
she was transported with joy on finding them, and used every exertion to
aid Jason in promoting his addresses to Medea. Æetes having seized the
treasures of Athamas on the death of Phryxus, the Greeks prepared an
expedition to recover them, and to avenge his death. Pelias, who had
driven his brother Æson from the throne of Iolcos, desiring to procure
the absence of his son Jason, took this opportunity of engaging him in
an enterprise, which promised both glory, profit, and a large amount of
personal exertion. The uneasiness which Pelias felt was caused by the
prediction of an oracle, that he should be killed by a prince of the
family of Æolus, and which warned him to beware of a person who should
have but one shoe. Just at that period, Jason, returning from the school
of Chiron, lost one of his shoes in crossing a river. On this, his uncle
was desirous to destroy him; but not daring to do so publicly, he
induced him to embark with the Argonauts, expecting that he would perish
in an undertaking of so perilous a nature. Many young nobles of Greece
repaired to the court of Iolcos, and joined in the undertaking, when
they chose Jason for their leader, and embarked in a ship, the name of
which was Argo, and from which the adventurers received the name of
Argonauts. Diodorus Siculus says, that the ship was so named from its swiftness; 229 while others say, that it was so called from Argus, the name of its
builder, or from the Argives, or Greeks, on board of it. Bochart,
however, supposes, that the name is derived from the Phœnician word
‘arco,’ which signifies ‘long,’ and suggests, that before that time the
Greeks sailed in vessels of a rounder form, Jason being the first who
sailed in a ship built in the form of a galley. After many adventures,
on arriving at the Isle of Lemnos, they found that the women had killed
their husbands in a fit of jealousy, on which the Argonauts took wives
from their number, and Jason received for his companion Hypsipyle, the
daughter of Thoas. Putting to sea again, they were driven on the coast
of Bithynia, where they delivered Phineus, its king, from the
persecution of the Harpies, who were in the habit of snatching away the
victuals from his table. These monsters, of hideous form, with crooked
beaks and talons, huge wings, and the faces of women, the Argonauts, and
especially Calais and Zethes, pursued as far as the islands called
Strophades, in the Ionian sea, where Iris appearing to them, enjoined
them to pursue the Harpies no further, promising that Phineus should no
longer be persecuted by them. To explain this story, some suppose that
the Harpies were the daughters of Phineus, who by their dissipation and
extravagance, had ruined him in his old age, which occasioned the
saying, that they snatched the victuals out of his mouth. Le Clerc
thinks, that the Harpies were vast swarms of grasshoppers, which ravaged 256 all Paphlagonia, and caused a famine in the dominions of Phineus; the
word ‘arbati,’ whence the term ‘Harpy’ is derived, signifying ‘a
grasshopper;’ and that the North wind blowing them into the Ionian sea,
it gave rise to the saying, that the sons of Boreas pursued them so far.
Diodorus Siculus does not mention the Harpies, though he speaks of the
arrival of the Argonauts at the court of Phineus. After some other adventures, the Argonauts arrived at Colchis. Æetes, or
Æeta, the king, having been forewarned by an oracle, that a stranger
should deprive him of his crown and life, had established a custom of
sacrificing all strangers found in his dominions. His daughter Medea,
falling in love with Jason, promised him her assistance in preserving
them from the dangers to which they were exposed, on the condition of
his marrying her. Having engaged to do so, she conducted him by night to
the royal palace, and gave him a false key, by means whereof he found
the royal treasures, and carrying them off, embarked with Medea and his
companions. By way of explaining the miraculous portion of the story, we
may, perhaps, not err in supposing, that the account of it was
originally written in the Phœnician language; and through not
understanding it, the Greeks invented the fiction of the Fleece, the
Dragon, and the Fiery Bulls. Bochart and Le Clerc have observed,
that the Syriac word ‘gaza,’ signifies either ‘a treasure,’ or ‘a
fleece.’ ‘Saur,’ which means ‘a wall,’ also means ‘a bull;’ and in the
same language the same word, ‘nachas,’ signifies both ‘brass,’ ‘iron,’
and ‘a dragon.’ Hence, instead of the simple narrative, that Jason, by
the aid of Medea, carried away the treasures which Æetes kept within
walls, with bolts, or locks of metal, and which Phryxus had carried to
Colchis in a ship with the figure of a ram at the prow, it was
published, and circulated by the ignorant, that the Gods, to save
Phryxus from his stepmother, sent him a sheep with a golden fleece, 230 VII. 159-176 which bore him to Colchis; that its fleece became the object of the
ambition of the leading men of Greece; and that whoever wished to bear
it away was obliged to contend with bulls and dragons. Some historians,
by way of interpreting the story, affirm, that the keeper of the
treasures was named ‘Draco,’ or ‘Dragon,’ and that the garrison of the
stronghold of Æetes was brought from the ‘Tauric’ Chersonesus. They say
also, that the fleece was the skin of the sheep which Phryxus had
sacrificed to Neptune, which he had caused to be gilt. It is not,
however, very likely, that an object so trifling could have excited the
avarice of the Greeks, and caused them to undertake an expedition
accompanied with so many dangers. The dragon’s teeth most probably bear
reference to some foreign troops which Jason, in the same way as Cadmus
had done, found means to alienate from Æetes, and to bring over to his
own side. Homer makes but very slight allusion to the adventures of the
Argonauts. 257 VII. 159-180 FABLE II. Jason , after his return home, requests
Medea to restore his father Æson to youth, which she performs; then,
going to the court of Pelias, she avenges the injuries which he had done
to the family of Jason, by making him the victim of the credulity of his
own daughters, who, in compliance with her pretended regard for them,
stab him to death. Medea, having executed her design, makes her escape
in her chariot. The Hæmonian mothers and aged
fathers bring presents, for receiving their sons safe home ; and
frankincense dissolves, piled on the flames, and the devoted victim
falls, having its horns gilded. But Æson is not among those
congratulating, being now near death, and worn out with the years of old
age; when thus the son of Æson addresses Medea : “O wife, to
whom I confess that I owe my safety, although thou hast granted me
everything, and the sum of thy favors exceeds all belief; still , if thy enchantments can effect this (and what can
enchantments not effect?), take away from my own years, and, when taken,
add them to those of my father.” And thus saying , he could not check his tears. She was moved
with the affection of the petitioner; and her father , Æetes, left
behind, recurred to her mind, unlike that of Jason ; yet she did
not confess any such feelings. “What a piece of wickedness, husband,”
said she, “has escaped thy affectionate lips! Can I, then, seem capable
of transferring to any one a portion of thy life? May Hecate not allow
of this; nor dost thou ask what is reasonable; but, Jason, I will
endeavor to grant thee a favor still greater than that which thou
art asking. By my arts 231 VII. 176-203 we will endeavor to bring back the long years of my father-in-law, and
not by means of thy years; if the Goddess of the triple form 20 do but
assist, and propitiously aid so vast an undertaking.” Three
nights were now wanting that the horns of the Moon might
meet entirely, and might form a perfect orb. After the 258 VII. 180-204 Moon shone in her full, and looked down upon the Earth, with her disk
complete, Medea went forth from the house, clothed in garments
flowing loose, with bare feet, 21 and having her unadorned hair
hanging over her shoulders, and unattended, directed her wandering steps
through the still silence of midnight. Sound sleep has now relaxed the nerves of both men, and birds, and beasts; the hedges
and the motionless foliage are still, without any noise, the dewy air is
still; the stars alone are twinkling; towards which, holding up her
arms, three times she turns herself about, three times she besprinkles
her hair with water taken from the stream; with three yells she opens
her mouth, and, her knee bending upon the hard ground, she says,
“O Night, most faithful to these my mysteries, and ye golden Stars,
who, with the Moon, succeed the fires of the day, and thou, three-faced
Hecate, 22 who comest conscious of my design, and ye charms and
arts of the enchanters, and thou, too, Earth, that dost furnish the
enchanters with powerful herbs; ye breezes, too, and winds, mountains,
rivers, and lakes, and all ye Deities of the groves, and all ye Gods of
night, attend here; through whose aid, whenever I will, the rivers run
back from their astonished banks to their sources, and by my
charms I calm the troubled sea, and rouse it when calm; I disperse
the clouds, and I bring clouds upon the Earth ; I both allay
the winds, and I raise them; and I break the jaws of 232 VII. 203-229 serpents with my words and my spells; I move, too, the solid rocks,
and the oaks torn up with their own native earth, and the forests as well . I command 259 VII. 204-229 the mountains, too, to quake, and the Earth to groan, and the ghosts to
come forth from their tombs. Thee, too, O Moon, do I draw down,
although the Temesæan 23 brass relieves thy pangs. By my spells, also,
the chariot of my grandsire is rendered pale; Aurora, too, is pale
through my enchantments. For me did ye blunt the flames of the bulls,
and with the curving plough you pressed the necks that never before bore
the yoke. You raised a cruel warfare for those born of the dragon among
themselves, and you lulled to sleep the keeper of the golden
fleece , that had never known sleep; and thus , deceiving the
guardian, you sent the treasure into the Grecian cities. Now there is
need of juices, by means of which, old age, being renewed, may return to
the bloom of life , and may receive back again its early years;
and this ye will give me; for not in vain did the stars just
now sparkle; nor yet in vain is the chariot come, drawn by the necks
of winged dragons.” A chariot sent down from heaven was come; which, soon as she had
mounted, and had stroked the harnessed necks of the dragons, and had
shaken the light reins with her hands, she was borne aloft, and looked
down upon Thessalian Tempe below her, and guided her dragons towards the
chalky regions; 24 and observed the herbs which Ossa, and which the
lofty Pelion bore, Othrys, too, and Pindus, and Olympus still greater than Pindus; and part she tore up by the root gently worked,
part she cut down with the bend of a brazen sickle. 25 Many a herb, too,
that grew on the banks of Apidanus 26 pleased her; many, too, on the
banks of Amphrysus; 260 VII. 229-249 233 VII. 229-249 nor, Enipeus, didst thou escape. The Peneian waters, and the Spercheian
as well, contributed something, and the rushy shores of Bœbe. 27 She
plucks, too, enlivening herbs by the Eubœan Anthedon, 28 not yet
commonly known by the change of the body of Glaucus. 29 And now the
ninth day, 30 and the ninth night had seen her visiting all the
fields in her chariot, and upon the wings of the dragons, when she
returned; nor had the dragons been fed, but with the odors of the
plants : and yet they cast the skin of old age full of years. On her
arrival she stood without the threshold and the gates, and was canopied
by the heavens alone, and avoided the contact of her husband, and
erected two altars of turf; on the right hand, one to Hecate, but on the
left side one to Youth. 31 After she had hung them round with vervain and
forest boughs, throwing up the earth from two trenches not far off, she
performed the rites, and plunged a knife into the throat of a black ram,
and besprinkled the wide trenches with blood. Then pouring thereon
goblets 32 of flowing wine, and pouring brazen goblets of warm
milk; she at the same time utters words, and calls upon the Deities of
the earth, and entreats the king of the shades 33 below, together with
his 261 VII. 249-271 ravished 234 VII. 249-273 wife, that they will not hasten to deprive the aged limbs of life. When
she had rendered them propitious both by prayers and prolonged
mutterings, she commanded the exhausted body of Æson to be brought out
to the altars, and stretched it cast into a deep sleep by her charms, and resembling one dead, upon the herbs laid beneath him. She orders the son of Æson to go far thence, and the attendants, too, to
go afar; and warns them to withdraw their profane eyes from her
mysteries. At her order, they retire. Medea, with dishevelled hair, goes
round the blazing altars like a worshipper of Bacchus, and dips her
torches, split into many parts, in the trench, black with blood, and
lights them, thus dipt, at the two altars. And thrice does she 34 purify the aged man with flames, thrice with water, and thrice with
sulphur. In the meantime the potent mixture 35 is boiling and
heaving in the brazen cauldron, placed on the flames , and whitens
with swelling froth. There she boils roots cut up in the Hæmonian
valleys, and seeds and flowers and acrid juices. She adds stones fetched
from the most distant East, and sand, which the ebbing tide of the ocean
has washed. She adds, too, hoar-frost gathered at night by the light of
the moon, and the ill-boding wings of a screech owl, 36 together with
its flesh; and the entrails of an ambiguous wolf, that was wont to
change its appearance of a wild beast into that of a man. Nor is
there wanting there 262 VII. 272-294 the thin scaly slough of the Cinyphian water-snake, 37 and the liver of
the long-lived 235 VII. 273-296 stag; 38 to which, besides, she adds the bill and head of a
crow that had sustained an existence of nine ages. When, with
these and a thousand other things without a name, the barbarian princess has completed the medicine prepared for the mortal body , with a branch of the peaceful olive long since dried up,
she stirs them all up, and blends the lowest ingredients with the
highest. Behold! the old branch, turned about in the heated cauldron, at
first becomes green; and after no long time assumes foliage, and is
suddenly loaded with heavy olives. Besides, wherever the fire throws the
froth from out of the hollow cauldron, and the boiling drops fall upon
the earth, the ground becomes green, and flowers and soft grass spring
up. Soon as Medea sees this, she opens the throat 39 of the old man with a
drawn sword; and allowing the former blood to escape, replenishes his
veins with juices. Soon as Æson has drunk them in, either received
in his mouth or in his wound, his beard and his hair 40 laying aside
their hoariness, assume a black hue. His leanness flies, being expelled;
his paleness and squalor are gone. His hollow veins are supplied with
additional blood, and his limbs become instinct with vigor. Æson is
astonished, and calls to recollection that he was such four times ten
years before. Liber had beheld from on high the miraculous operations of so great a
prodigy; and taught thereby that 263 VII. 295-315 youthful years can be restored to his nurses, 41 he requests this
present from the daughter of Æetes. 42 236 VII. 297-325 And that her arts 43 may not cease, the Phasian feigns a
counterfeit quarrel with her husband, and flies as a suppliant to the
threshold of Pelias 44 and (as he himself is oppressed with old age) his
daughters receive her; whom, after a short time, the crafty Colchian
engages to herself by the appearance of a pretended friendship. And
while among the greatest of her merits, she relates that the infirmities
of Æson have been removed, and is dwelling upon that part of the
story , a hope is suggested to the damsels, the daughters of
Pelias, that by the like art their parent may become young again; and
this they request of her , and repeatedly entreat her to name her
own price. For a short time she is silent, and appears to be hesitating,
and keeps their mind in suspense, as they ask, with an affected
gravity. Afterwards, when she has promised them, she says, “That there may be
the greater confidence in this my skill, the leader of the flock among
your sheep, which is the most advanced in age, shall become a lamb by
this preparation.” Immediately, a fleecy ram , enfeebled by
innumerable years, is brought, with his horns bending around his hollow
temples; whose withered throat, when she has cut with the Hæmonian
knife, and stained the steel with its scanty blood, the enchantress
plunges the limbs of the sheep, and her potent juices together, into the
hollow copper. The limbs of 264 VII. 316-345 his body are lessened, and he puts off his horns, and his years together
with his horns; and in the midst of the kettle a low bleating is heard.
And without any delay, while they are wondering at the bleating,
a lamb springs forth, and gambols in its course, and seeks the
suckling dugs. The daughters of Pelias are amazed; and after her
promises have obtained her credit, then, indeed, they urge her still
more strongly. Phœbus had thrice taken the yoke off his horses sinking
in the Iberian sea; 45 and upon the fourth night the radiant stars were
twinkling, 237 VII. 326-349 when the deceitful daughter of Æetes set pure water upon a blazing fire,
and herbs without any virtue. And now sleep like to death, their bodies
being relaxed, had seized the king, and the guards together with their king, which her charms and the influence of her
enchanting tongue had caused. The daughters of the king , as ordered, had entered the threshold, together with the
Colchian, and had surrounded the bed; “Why do you hesitate now, in your
indolence? Unsheathe your swords,” says she, “and exhaust the ancient
gore, that I may replenish his empty veins with youthful blood. The life
and the age of your father is now in your power. If you have any
affection and cherish not vain hopes, perform your duty to your father,
and drive away old age with your weapons, and, thrusting in the steel,
let out his corrupted blood.” Upon this exhortation, as each of them is affectionate, she becomes
especially undutiful, and that she may not be wicked, she commits
wickedness. Yet not one is able to look upon her own blow; and they turn away their eyes , and turning away their faces,
they deal chance blows with their cruel right hands. He, streaming with
gore, yet raises his limbs on his elbows, and, half-mangled, attempts to
rise from the couch; and in the midst of so many swords stretching forth
his pale arms, he says, “What 265 VII. 346-354 are you doing, my daughters? What arms you against the life of your
parent?” Their courage and their hands fail them . As he is about
to say more, the Colchian severs his throat, together with his words,
and plunges him, thus mangled, in the boiling cauldron. EXPLANATION. The authors who have endeavored to explain the true meaning and origin
of the story of the restitution of Æson to youth, are much divided in
their opinions concerning it. Some think it refers to the mystery of
reviving the decrepit and aged by the transfusion of youthful blood. It
is, however, not improbable, that Medea obtained the reputation of being
a sorceress, only because she had been taught by her mother the virtues
of various plants: and that she administered a potion to Æson, which
furnished him with new spirits and strength. The daughters of Pelias being desirous to obtain the same favor of Medea
for their father, she, to revenge the evils which he had brought upon
her husband and his family, may possibly have mixed some venomous herbs
in his drink, which immediately killed him. 238 VII. 350-362 FABLE III. Medea , after having killed Pelias, goes
through several countries to Corinth, where, finding that Jason, in her
absence, has married the daughter of king Creon, she sets fire to the
palace, whereby the princess and her father are consumed. She then
murders the two children which she had by Jason, before his face, and
takes to flight. And unless she had mounted into the
air with winged dragons, she would not have been exempt from punishment;
she flies aloft, over both shady Pelion, the lofty habitation 46 of the
son of Phillyra, and over Othrys, and the places noted for the fate of
the ancient Cerambus. 47 He, by the aid of Nymphs, being lifted on
wings into the air, when the ponderous earth was covered by 266 VII. 355-365 the sea pouring over it, not being overwhelmed, escaped the flood of
Deucalion. On the left side, she leaves the Æolian Pitane, 48 and the
image of the long Dragon 49 made out of stone, and the wood of Ida, 50 in which Bacchus hid a stolen bullock beneath the appearance of a
fictitious stag; the spot too, where the father of Corythus 51 lies buried beneath a little sand, and the fields which Mæra 52 alarmed
by her unusual barking. 239 VII. 363-370 The city, too, of Eurypylus, 53 in which the Coan matrons 54 wore
horns, at the time when the herd of Hercules 55 departed thence ; Phœbean Rhodes 56 also, and 267 VII. 365-382 the Ialysian Telchines, 57 whose eyes 58 corrupting all things by the very
looking upon them, Jupiter utterly hating, thrust beneath the waves of
his brother. She passed, too, over the Cartheian walls of ancient Cea, 59 where her father Alcidamas 60 was destined to wonder that a gentle
dove could arise from the body of his daughter. 240 VII. 371-389 After that, she beholds the lakes of Hyrie, 61 and Cycneian Tempe, 62 which the swan that had suddenly become such, frequented. For there
Phyllius, at the request of the boy, had given him birds, and a fierce
lion tamed; being ordered, too, to subdue a bull, he had subdued him;
and being angry at his despising his love so often, he denied him, when begging the bull as his last reward. The other, indignant,
said, “Thou shalt wish that thou hadst given it;” and then leaped
from a high rock. All imagined he had fallen; but, transformed into a
swan, he hovered in the air on snow-white wings. But his mother, Hyrie,
not knowing that he was saved, dissolved in tears, and formed a lake called after her own name. Adjacent to these places is Pleuron; 63 in which 268 VII. 383-396 Combe, 64 the daughter of Ophis, escaped the wounds of her sons
with trembling wings. After that, she sees the fields of Calaurea, 65 sacred to Latona, conscious of the transformation of their king,
together with his wife, into birds. Cyllene is on the right hand, on
which Menephron 66 was one day to lie with his mother, after the
manner of savage beasts. Far hence she beholds Cephisus, 67 lamenting the
fate of his grandson, changed 241 VII. 389-401 by Apollo into a bloated sea-calf; and the house of Eumelus, 68 lamenting his son in the air. At length, borne on the wings of her dragons, she reached the
Pirenian Ephyre. 69 Here, those of ancient times promulgated that in the
early ages mortal bodies were produced from mushrooms springing from
rain. But after the new-made bride was consumed, through the Colchian
drugs, and both seas beheld the king’s house on fire, her wicked sword
was bathed in the blood of her sons; and the mother, having thus barbarously revenged herself, fled from the arms of Jason. 269 VII. 397-401 Being borne hence by her Titanian dragons, 70 she entered the city
of Pallas, which saw thee, most righteous Phineus, 71 and thee, aged
Periphas, 72 flying together, and the granddaughter of Polypemon 73 resting upon new-formed wings. EXPLANATION. Jason being reconciled to the children of Pelias, gave the crown to his
son Acastus. Becoming tired of Medea, he married Glauce, or Creüsa, the
daughter of Creon, king of Corinth. Medea, hastening to that place, left
her two sons in the temple of Juno, and set fire to Creon’s palace,
where he and 242 his daughter were consumed to ashes, after which she killed her own
children. Euripides, in his tragedy of Medea, makes a chorus of
Corinthian women say, that the Corinthians themselves committed the
murder, and that the Gods sent a plague on the city, as a punishment for
the deed. Pausanias also says, that the tomb of Medea’s children, whom
the Corinthians stoned to death, was still to be seen in his time; and
that the Corinthians offered sacrifices there every year, to appease
their ghosts, as the oracle had commanded them. Apollodorus relates this story in a different manner. He says, that
Medea sent her rival a crown, dipped in a sort of gum of a combustible
nature; and that when Glauce had put it on her head, it began to burn so
furiously, that the young princess perished in the greatest
misery. Medea afterwards retired to Thebes, where Hercules engaged to
give her assistance against Jason, which promise, however, he failed to
perform. Going thence to Athens, she married Ægeus. The story of her winged dragons may, perhaps, be based on the fact, that
her ship was called ‘the Dragon.’ In recounting the particulars of her
flight, Ovid makes allusion to several stories by the way, the most of
which are entirely unknown to us. With regard 270 VII. 402-408 to these fictions, it may not be out of place to remark here, as
affording a key to many of them, that where a person escaped from any
imminent danger, it was published that he had been changed into a bird.
If, to avoid pursuit, a person hid himself in a cave, he was said
to be transformed into a serpent; and if he burst into tears, from
excess of grief, he was reported to have changed into a fountain; while,
if a damsel lost herself in a wood, she became a Nymph, or a Dryad. The
resemblance of names, also, gave rise to several fictions: thus, Alopis
was changed into a fox; Cygnus into a swan; Coronis into a crow; and
Cerambus into a horned beetle. As some few of the stories here alluded
to by Ovid, refer to historical events, it may be remarked, that the account of the women of Cos being changed into cows, is thought by some to have
been founded on the cruel act of the companions of Hercules, who
sacrificed some of them to the Gods of the country. The inhabitants of
the Isle of Rhodes were said to have been changed into rocks, because
they perished in an inundation, which laid a part of that island under
water, and particularly the town of Ialysus. The fruitfulness of the
daughter of Alcidamas occasioned it to be said, that she was changed
into a dove. The rage of Mæra is shown by her transformation into a
bitch; and Arne was changed into a daw, because, having sold her
country, her avarice was well depicted under the symbol of that bird,
which, according to the popular opinion, is fond of money. Phillyra, the
mother of the Centaur Chiron, was said to be changed into a linden-tree,
probably because she happened to bear the name of that tree, which in
the Greek language is called φιλύρα . 243 VII. 402-423 FABLE IV. Hercules chains the dog Cerberus, the
guardian of the gates of the Infernal Regions. Theseus, after his
exploits at Corinth, arrives at Athens, where Medea prepares a cup of
poison for him. The king, however, recognizing his son, just as he is
about to drink, snatches away the cup from him, while Medea flies in her
chariot. Ægeus then makes a festival, to celebrate the arrival and
preservation of Theseus. In the mean time, Minos, the king of Crete,
solicits several princes to assist him in a war against Athens, to
revenge the death of his son Androgeus, who had been murdered there. Ægeus , to be blamed for this deed
alone, shelters her; and hospitality is not enough, he also joins her to himself by the ties of marriage. And now was Theseus, his son,
arrived, unknown to his father, who, by his valor, had established peace
in the Isthmus between the two seas. For his destruction Medea mingles
the wolfsbane, which she once brought with her from the shores of
Scythia. This, they say, sprang from the teeth of 271 VII. 409-428 the Echidnean dog. There is a gloomy cave, 74 with a dark entrance, wherein there is a descending path, along which the Tirynthian
hero dragged away Cerberus resisting, and turning his eyes sideways from
the day and the shining rays of the Sun , in chains formed of
adamant; he, filled with furious rage, filled the air with triple
barkings at the same moment, and sprinkled the verdant fields with white
foam. This, they suppose, grew solid, and, receiving the nourishment of
a fruitful and productive soil, acquired the power of being noxious.
Because, full of life, it springs up on the hard rock, the rustics call
it aconite. 75 This, by the contrivance of his wife, the father Ægeus himself
presented to his son, 76 as though to an enemy. Theseus had received
the presented cup with unsuspecting right hand, when his father
perceived upon the ivory hilt of his sword the 244 VII. 423-439 tokens of his race, 77 and struck the guilty draught from his
mouth. She escaped death, having raised clouds by her enchantments. But the father, although he rejoices at his son’s being safe,
astonished that so great a wickedness can be committed with so narrow an
escape from death, heats the altars with fires, and loads the Gods with
gifts; and the 272 VII. 429-443 axes strike the muscular necks of the oxen having their horns bound with
wreaths. No day is said ever to have shone upon the people of
Erectheus more famous than that—the senators and the common people
keep up the festivity; songs, too, they sing, wine inspiring wit. “Thee,
greatest Theseus,” said they, “Marathon 78 admired for shedding the
blood of the Cretan bull; and that the husbandman ploughs Cromyon 79 in safety from the boar, is thy procurement and thy work. By thy means
the country of Epidaurus saw the club-bearing son of Vulcan 80 fall; and the banks of the river Cephisus 81 saw the cruel
Procrustes fall by thee . Eleusis, sacred to Ceres, beheld the
death of Cercyon. 82 245 VII. 439-460 Sinnis 83 fell too, who barbarously used his great powers; who
was able to bend huge beams, and used to pull pine trees from
aloft to the earth, destined to scatter human bodies far and
wide. The road to Alcathoë, 84 the Lelegeïan 273 VII. 443-463 city, is now open in safety, Scyron 85 being laid low in death : and the earth denies a resting-place, the water, too ,
denies a resting-place to the bones of the robber scattered piecemeal;
these, long tossed about, length of time is reported to have hardened
into rocks. To these rocks the name of Scyron adheres. If we
should reckon up thy glorious deeds, and thy years, thy actions would
exceed thy years in number . For thee, bravest hero , we
make public vows: in thy honor do we quaff the draughts of wine.” The
palace rings with the acclamations of the populace, and the prayers of
those applauding; and there is no place sorrowing throughout the whole
city. And yet (so surely is the pleasure of no one unalloyed, and some
anxiety is ever interposing amid joyous circumstances), Ægeus
does not have his joy undisturbed, on receiving back his son. Minos
prepares for war; who, though he is strong in soldiers, strong in
shipping, is still strongest of all in the resentment of a parent, and,
with retributive arms, avenges the death of his son Androgeus.
Yet, before the war, he obtains auxiliary forces, and crosses the sea
with a swift fleet, in which 2436 VII. 460-468 he is accounted strong. On the one side, he joins Anaphe 86 to himself;
and the realms of Astypale; Anaphe by treaty, the realms of Astypale by
conquest; on the other side, the low Myconos, and the chalky lands of
Cimolus, 87 and the flourishing Cythnos, Scyros, 274 VII. 464-468 and the level Seriphos; 88 Paros, too, abounding in marble, and the
island wherein the treacherous Sithonian 89 betrayed the citadel,
on receiving the gold, which, in her covetousness, she had demanded. She
was changed into a bird, which even now has a passion for gold, the
jackdaw namely , black-footed, and covered with black
feathers. EXPLANATION. If it is the fact, as many antiquarians suppose, that much of the
Grecian mythology was derived from that of the Egyptians, there can be
but little doubt that their system of the Elysian Fields and the
Infernal Regions was derived from the Egyptian notions on the future
state of man. The story too, of Cerberus is, perhaps, based upon
the custom of the Egyptians, who kept dogs to guard the fields or
caverns in which they kept their mummies. It is, however, very possible that the story of Cerberus may have been
founded upon a fact, or what was believed to be such. There was a
serpent which haunted the cavern of Tænarus, in Laconia, and ravaged the
districts adjacent to that promontory. This cave, being generally
considered to be one of the avenues to the kingdom of Pluto, the poets
thence derived the notion that this serpent was the guardian of its
portals. Pausanias observes, that Homer was the first who said that
Cerberus was a dog; though, in reality, he was a serpent, whose name in
the Greek language signified ‘one that devours flesh.’ The story that
Cerberus, with his foam, poisoned the herbs that grew in Thessaly, and
that the aconite and other poisonous plants were ever after common
there, is probably based on the simple fact, that those herbs were found
in great quantities in that region. Women, using these herbs in their pretended enchantments, gave ground
for the stories of the witches of Thessaly, and of their ability to
bring the 247 VII. 469-481 moon down to the earth by their spells and incantations; which latter
notion was probably based on the circumstance, that these women used to
invoke the Night and the Moon as witnesses of their magical
operations. 275 VII. 469-481 FABLE V. Minos , having engaged several powers in
his interest, and having been refused by others, goes to the island of Ægina,
where Æacus reigns, to endeavor to secure an alliance with that prince;
but without success. Upon his departure, Cephalus arrives, as
ambassador, from Athens, and obtains succors from the king; who gives
him an account of the desolation which a pestilence had formerly made in
his country, and of the surprising manner in which it had been re-peopled . But Oliaros, 90 and Didyme, and
Tenos, 91 and Andros, 92 and Gyaros, 93 and Peparethos,
fruitful in the smooth olive, 94 do not aid the Gnossian ships. Then
Minos makes for Œnopia, 95 the kingdom of Æacus, lying to the left. The
ancients called it Œnopia, but Æacus himself called it Ægina, from the
name of his mother. The multitude rushes forth, and desires greatly to
know a man of so great celebrity. Both Telamon, 96 and Peleus, younger
than Telamon, and Phocus, the king’s third son, go to meet him.
Æacus himself, too, though slow through the infirmity of old age,
goes forth, and asks him what is the reason of his coming? The ruler of
a hundred cities, being 248 VII. 481-512 put in mind of his fatherly sorrow for his son , sighs, and gives
him this answer: “I beg 276 VII. 482-509 thee to assist arms taken up on account of my son; and be a party in a
war of affection. For his shades do I demand satisfaction.” To him the
grandson of Asopus says, “Thou askest in vain, and for a thing not to be done by
my city; for, indeed, there is no land more closely allied to the people
of Cecropia. Such are the terms of our compact.” Minos goes away in sadness, and says, “This compact of thine will cost thee a
dear price;” and he thinks it more expedient to threaten war than to
wage it, and to waste his forces there prematurely. Even yet may the Lyctian 97 fleet be beheld from the Œnopian
walls, when an Attic ship, speeding onward with full sail, appears, and
enters the friendly harbor, which is carrying Cephalus, and together with him the request of his native country. The youthful sons of
Æacus recognize Cephalus, although seen but after a long period, and
give their right hands, and lead him into the house of their father. The
graceful hero, even still retaining some traces of his former beauty,
enters; and, holding a branch of his country’s olive, being the elder,
he has on his right and left hand the two younger in age, Clytus and
Butes, the sons of Pallas. 98 After their first meeting has had
words suitable thereto , Cephalus relates the request of the
people of Cecrops, and begs assistance, and recounts the treaties and
alliances of their forefathers; and he adds, that the subjection of the
whole of Achaia is aimed at. After the eloquence of Cephalus has
thus promoted the cause entrusted to him, Æacus, leaning with his left
hand on the handle of his sceptre, says— “Ask not for assistance, O Athens, but take it, and consider, beyond
doubt, the resources which this island possesses, as thy own, and let
all the forces of my kingdom go along with thee . Strength is not
wanting. I have soldiers enough both for my defence, and for 277 VII. 510-537 opposing the enemy. Thanks to the Gods; this is a prosperous
time, and one that can excuse no refusal of mine.” “Yes, and be
it so,” says Cephalus: 99 249 VII. 512-545 “and I pray
that thy power may increase along with thy citizens. Indeed, as I came
along just now, I received much pleasure, when a number of
youths, so comely and so equal in their ages, came forward to meet me.
Yet I miss many from among them, whom I once saw when I was formerly
entertained in this city.” Æacus heaves a sigh, and thus he says, with
mournful voice: “A better fortune will be following a lamentable
beginning; I only wish I could relate this to you.
I will now tell it you without any order, that I may not be
detaining you by any long preamble. 100 They are now lying as
bones and ashes, for whom thou art inquiring with tenacious memory. And
how great a part were they of my resources that perished!
A dreadful pestilence fell upon my people, through the anger of the
vengeful Juno, who hated a country named 101 from her rival.
While the calamity seemed natural, and the baneful cause of so great
destruction was unknown, it was opposed by the resources of medicine. But the havoc exceeded all help, which now lay
baffled. At first the heaven encompassed the earth with a thick
darkness, and enclosed within its clouds a drowsy heat. And while the
Moon was four times filling her orb by joining her horns, and ,
four times decreasing, was diminishing her full orb, the hot South winds
were blowing with their deadly blasts. It is known for a fact that the
infection came even into fountains and lakes, and that many thousands of
serpents were wandering over the uncultivated fields, and were tainting
the rivers with their venom. The violence of this sudden distemper was
first discovered by the destruction of dogs, and birds, and sheep, and
oxen, and among the wild beasts. 278 VII. 538-566 The unfortunate ploughman wonders that strong oxen fall down at their
work, and lie stretched in the middle of the furrow. And while
the wool-bearing flocks utter weakly bleatings, both their wool falls
off spontaneously, and their bodies pine away. The horse, once of high
mettle, and of great fame on the course, degenerates for the purposes
of victory; and, forgetting his ancient honors, he groans at the
manger, doomed to perish by an inglorious distemper. The boar remembers
not to 250 VII. 545-576 be angry, nor the hind to trust to her speed, nor the bears to rush upon
the powerful herds. “A faintness seizes all animals ; both in the woods, in the
fields, and in the roads, loathsome carcases lie strewed. The air is
corrupted with the smell of them . I am relating strange
events. The dogs, and the ravenous birds, and the hoary wolves, touch
them not; falling away, they rot, and, by their exhalations, produce
baneful effects, and spread the contagion far and wide. With more
dreadful destruction the pestilence reaches the wretched husbandmen, and
riots within the walls of the extensive city. At first, the bowels are
scorched, 102 and a redness, and the breath drawn with
difficulty, is a sign of the latent flame. The tongue, grown rough, swells; and the parched mouth gapes, with its throbbing veins;
the noxious air, too, is inhaled by the breathing. The infected cannot endure a bed, or any coverings; but they lay their hardened
breasts upon the earth, and their bodies are not made cool by the
ground, but the ground is made hot by their bodies. There is no
physician at hand; the cruel malady breaks out upon even those who
administer remedies; and their own arts become an injury to their
owners. The nearer at hand any one is, and the more faithfully he
attends on the sick, the sooner does he come in for his share of the
fatality. And when the hope of recovery is departed, and they see the
end of their malady only in death, they indulge their humors, and
there is no 279 VII. 567-596 concern as to what is to their advantage; for, indeed , nothing is
to their advantage. All sense, too, of shame being banished, they lie promiscuously close to the fountains and rivers, and deep wells;
and their thirst is not extinguished by drinking, before their life is . Many, overpowered with the disease , are unable to
arise thence, and die amid the very water; and yet another even drinks
that water . So great, too, is the irksomeness for the wretched creatures of their hated beds, that they leap out, or, if
their strength forbids them standing, they roll their bodies upon the
ground, and every man flies from his own dwelling; each one’s house
seems fatal to him: and since the cause of the calamity is unknown, the
place that is known 251 VII. 576-611 is blamed. You might see persons, half dead, wandering about the roads,
as long as they were able to stand; others, weeping and lying about on
the ground, and rolling their wearied eyes with the dying movement. They
stretch, too, their limbs towards the stars of the overhanging heavens,
breathing forth their lives here and there, where death has overtaken
them. “What were my feelings then? Were they not such as they ought to be,
to hate life, and to desire to be a sharer with my people? On whichever
side my eyes were turned, there was the multitude strewed on the
earth , just as when rotten apples fall from the moved branches, and
acorns from the shaken holm-oak. Thou seest 103 a lofty temple,
opposite thee , raised on high with long steps: Jupiter has it as his own . Who did not offer incense at those altars in vain?
how often did the husband, while he was uttering words of entreaty for
his wife, or the father for his son, end his life at the altars
without prevailing? in his hand, too, was part of the frankincense found
unconsumed! How often did the bulls, when brought to the temples, while
the priest was making his supplications, and pouring the pure wine
between their horns, fall without waiting for the wound! While I myself
was offering sacrifice to Jupiter, for myself, and my country, and my
three sons, 280 VII. 597-613 the victim sent forth dismal lowings, and suddenly falling down without
any blow, stained the knives thrust into it, with its scanty blood; the
diseased entrails, too, had lost all marks of truth, and the
warnings of the Gods. The baneful malady penetrated to the entrails.
I have seen the carcases lying, thrown out before the sacred doors;
before the very altars, too , that death might become more
odious 104 to the Gods . Some finish their lives with
the halter, and by death dispel the apprehension of death, and
voluntarily invite approaching fate. The bodies of the dead are not
borne out with any funeral rites, according to the custom; for the city gates cannot receive the multitude of the
processions. Either unburied they lie upon the ground, or they are laid
on the lofty pyres without the usual honors. And now there is no
distinction, and they struggle for the piles; and they are burnt on
fires that belong to others. They who should 252 VII. 611-622 weep are wanting; and the souls of sons , and of husbands, of old and of
young, wander about unlamented: there is not room sufficient for the
tombs, nor trees for the fires .” EXPLANATION. Minos (most probably the second prince that bore that name), upon his
accession to the throne, after the death of his father, Lycastus, made
several conquests in the islands adjoining Crete, where he reigned, and,
at last, became master of those seas. The strength of his fleet is
particularly remarked by Thucydides, Apollodorus, and Diodorus
Siculus. The Feast of the Panathenæa being celebrated at Athens, Minos sent his
son Androgeus to it, who joined as a combatant in the games, and was
sufficiently skilful to win all the prizes. The glory which he thereby
acquired, combined with his polished manners, obtained him the
friendship of the sons of Pallas, the brother of Ægeus. This
circumstance caused Ægeus to entertain jealous feelings, the more
especially as he knew that his nephews were conspiring against him.
Being informed that Androgeus was about to take a journey to Thebes, he
caused him to be assassinated near Œnoë, a town on the confines of
Attica. Apollodorus, indeed, says that he was killed by the Bull of
Marathon, which was then making great ravages in Greece; but it is very
possible that the Athenians encouraged this belief, with the view of
screening their king from the infamy of an action so inhuman and unjust. 281 VII. 614-632 Diodorus Siculus and Plutarch agree in stating that Ægeus himself caused
Androgeus to be murdered. On hearing the news of his son’s death, Minos resolved on revenge. He
ordered a strong fleet to be fitted out, and went in person to several
courts, to contract alliances, and engage other powers to assist him;
and this, with the history of the plague at Ægina, forms the subject of
the present narrative. FABLE VI. Jupiter , at the prayer of his son
Æacus, transforms the ants that are in the hollow of an old oak into
men; these, from the Greek name of those insects, are called
Myrmidons. “ Stupefied by so great an outburst
of misery, I said, ‘O Jupiter! if stories do not falsely say that
thou didst come into the embraces of Ægina, the daughter of Asopus, and
thou art not ashamed, great Father, to be the parent of myself; either
restore my people to me, or else bury me, as well, in the sepulchre.’ He
gave a signal by lightnings, and by propitious thunders. I accepted the omen , and I said, ‘I pray that these may be happy signs of
thy intentions: the omen which thou givest me, I accept as a
pledge.’ By chance there was close 253 VII. 622-654 by, an oak sacred to Jupiter, of seed from Dodona, 105 but thinly
covered with wide-spreading boughs. Here we beheld some ants, the
gatherers of corn, in a long train, carrying a heavy burden in their
little mouths, and keeping their track in the wrinkled bark. While I was
wondering at their numbers, I said, ‘Do thou, most gracious Father,
give me citizens as many in number, and replenish my empty walls.’ The
lofty oak trembled, and made a noise in its boughs, moving without a
breeze. My limbs quivered, with trembling fear, and my hair stood on an
end; yet I gave kisses to the earth and to the oak, nor did I confess
that I had any 282 VII. 633-660 hopes; and yet I did hope, and I cherished my own wishes in my
mind. Night came on, and sleep seized my body wearied with anxiety.
Before my eyes the same oak seemed to be present, and to bear as many
branches, and as many animals in its branches, and to be trembling with
a similar motion, and to be scattering the grain-bearing troop on the
fields below. These suddenly grew, and seemed greater and greater, and
raised themselves from the ground, and stood with their bodies upright;
and laid aside their leanness, and the former number of their
feet, and their sable hue, and assumed in their limbs the human
shape. “Sleep departs. When now awake, I censured the vision,
and complained that there was no help for me from the Gods above. But
within my palace there was a great murmur, and I seemed to be hearing
the voices of men, to which I had now become unaccustomed. While I was
supposing that these, too, were a part of my dream, lo! Telamon
came in haste, and, opening the door, said, ‘Father, thou wilt see
things beyond thy hopes or expectations. Do come out.’ I did go out, and
I beheld and recognized such men, each in his turn, as I had seemed to
behold in the vision of my sleep. They approached, and saluted me as
their king. I offered up vows to Jupiter, and divided the city and
the lands void of their former tillers, among this new-made people, and
I called them Myrmidons, 106 and did not 254 VII. 654-671 deprive their name of the marks of their origin. Thou hast beheld
their persons. Even still do they retain the manners which they formerly
had; and they are a thrifty race, patient of toil, tenacious of what
they get, and what they get they lay up. These, alike in years and in
courage, will attend thee to the war, as soon as the East wind, which
brought thee prosperously hither (for the East wind had brought him),
shall have changed to the South .” EXPLANATION. This fable, perhaps, has no other foundation than the retreat of 283 VII. 661-674 the subjects of Æacus into woods and caverns, whence they returned, when
the contagion had ceased with which their country had been afflicted,
and when he had nearly lost all hopes of seeing them again. It is
probable that the old men were carried off by the plague, while the
young, who had more strength, resisted its power, which circumstance
would fully account for the active habits of the remaining subjects of
Æacus. Some writers, however, suppose that the Myrmidons were a
barbarous, but industrious people of Thessaly, who usually dwelt in
caves, and who were brought thence by Æacus to people his island, which
had been made desolate by a pestilence. The similarity of their name to
the Greek word μύρμηξ , signifying ‘an ant,’ most probably
gave occasion to the report that Jupiter had changed ants into men. FABLE VII. Cephalus , having resisted the advances
of Aurora, who has become enamoured of him while hunting, returns in
disguise to his wife, Procris, to try if her affection for him is
sincere. She, discovering his suspicions , flies to the woods, and becomes a
huntress, with the determination not to see him again. Afterwards, on
becoming reconciled to him, she bestows on him a dog and a dart, which
Diana had once given her. The dog is turned into stone, while hunting a
wild beast, which Themis has sent to ravage the territories of Thebes,
after the interpretation of the riddle of the Sphinx, by Œdipus. In these and other narratives they
passed the day. The last part of the day was spent in feasting, and the
night in sleep. The golden Sun had now shed his beams, when the East wind was still blowing, and detained the sails
about to return. The sons of Pallas repair to Cephalus, who was stricken
in years. Cephalus and the sons of Pallas, together with him , come to the king; but a sound sleep still possessed the monarch.
Phocus, the son of Æacus, received them at the threshold; for Telamon
and his brother were levying men for the war. Phocus conducted the
citizens of Cecrops into an inner room, and a 255 VII. 671-702 handsome apartment. Soon as he had sat down with them, he observed that
the grandson of Æolus 107 was holding in his hand a javelin made of an
unknown wood, the point of which was of gold. Having first spoken a few words in promiscuous conversation, 284 VII. 675-702 he said, “I am fond of the forests, and of the chase of wild beasts;
still, from what wood the shaft of the javelin, which thou art holding,
is cut, I have been for some time in doubt; certainly, if it were
of wild ash, it would be of brown color; if of cornel-wood, there would
be knots in it. Whence it comes I am ignorant, but my eyes have not
looked upon a weapon used for a javelin, more beautiful than this.” One
of the Athenian brothers replied, and said, “In it, thou wilt admire its
utility, even more than its beauty. Whatever it is aimed at, it
strikes; chance does not guide it when thrown, and it flies back stained
with blood, no one returning it.” Then, indeed, does the Nereian youth 108 inquire into all particulars, why it was given, and
whence it came ? who was the author of a present of so great
value? What he asks, Cephalus tells him; but as to what he is
ashamed to tell, and on what condition he received it, he is
silent; and, being touched with sorrow for the loss of his wife, he thus
speaks, with tears bursting forth: “Son of a Goddess, this weapon (who
could have believed it?) makes me weep, and long will make me do so, if
the Fates shall grant me long to live. ’Twas this that proved the
destruction of me and of my dear wife. Would that I had ever been
without this present! Procris was (if perchance the fame of Orithyïa 109 may have more probably reached thy ears) the sister
of Orithyïa, the victim of violence. If you should choose to compare the
face and the manners of the two, she was the more worthy to be carried
off. Her father Erectheus united her to me; love, too , united her
to me. I was pronounced happy, and so I was. Not thus did it
seem good to the Gods; or even now, perhaps, I should be so . The second month was now passing, after the marriage rites,
when the saffron-colored Aurora, dispelling the darkness in the morn,
beheld me, as I was planting nets for the horned deer, from 256 VII. 702-731 the highest summit of the 285 VII. 702-728 ever-blooming Hymettus, 110 and carried me off against my
will. By the permission of the Goddess, let me relate what is true;
though she is comely with her rosy face, and though she possesses
the confines of light, and possesses the confines of darkness,
though she is nourished with the draughts of nectar, still I
loved Procris; Procris was ever in my thoughts, Procris was ever
on my lips. I alleged the sacred ties of marriage, our late
embraces, and our recent union, and the prior engagements of my forsaken
bed. The Goddess was provoked, and said, ‘Cease thy complaints,
ungrateful man; keep thy Procris; but, if my mind is gifted with
foresight, thou wilt wish that thou hadst not had her;’” and thus , in anger, she sent me back to her. “While I was returning, and was revolving the sayings of the Goddess
within myself, there began to be apprehensions that my wife had not duly
observed the laws of wedlock. Both her beauty and her age bade me be
apprehensive of her infidelity; yet her virtue forbade me to
believe it. But yet, I had been absent; and besides, she, from whom
I was just returning, was an example of such criminality:
but we that are in love, apprehend all mishaps .
I then endeavored to discover that, by reason of which I
must feel anguish, and by bribes to make attempts 111 upon her chaste
constancy. Aurora encouraged this apprehension, and changed my shape, as I seemed then to perceive. I entered Athens, the
city of Pallas, unknown to any one , and I went into my own house.
The house itself was without fault, and gave indications of chastity,
and was in concern for the carrying off of its master. “Having, with difficulty, made my way to the daughter of Erectheus by
means of a thousand artifices, soon as I beheld her, I was amazed,
and was nearly abandoning my projected trial of her constancy; with 286 VII. 729-752 difficulty did I restrain myself from telling the truth, with difficulty
from giving her the kisses which I ought. She was in sorrow; but yet no
one could be more beautiful 257 VII. 732-756 than she, even in her sadness; and she was consuming with regret
for her husband, torn from her. Only think, Phocus, how great was
the beauty of her, whom even sorrow did so much become. Why should I
tell how often her chaste manners repulsed all my attempts? How
often she said, ‘I am reserved for but one, wherever he is; for
that one do I reserve my joys.’ For whom, in his senses, would not that
trial of her fidelity have been sufficiently great? Yet I was not
content; and I strove to wound myself, while I was promising to give
vast sums for but one night, and forced her at last to waver, by
increasing the reward. On this I cried out, ‘Lo! I, the
gallant in disguise, to my sorrow, and lavish in promises, to my
misery, am thy real husband; thou treacherous woman! thou art caught, and I the witness.’ She said nothing: only, overwhelmed with
silent shame, she fled from the house of treachery, together with her
wicked husband; and from her resentment against me, abhorring the whole
race of men, she used to wander 112 on the mountains, employed in the
pursuits of Diana. Then, a more violent flame penetrated to my
bones, thus deserted. I begged forgiveness, and owned myself in
fault; and that I too might have yielded to a similar fault, on presents
being made; if presents so large had been offered. Upon my confessing
this, having first revenged her offended modesty, she was restored to
me, and 287 VII. 779-795 passed the pleasant years in harmony with me. She gave me, besides, as
though in herself she had given me but a small present, a dog as a
gift, which when her own Cynthia had presented to her, she had said, ‘He
will excel all dogs in running.’ She gave her, too, a javelin,
which, as thou seest, I am carrying in my hand. 258 VII. 757-782 “Dost thou inquire what was the fortune of the other
present—hear then . Thou wilt be astonished at the novelty
of the wondrous fact. The son of Laius 113 had solved the verses not
understood by the wit of others before him; and the mysterious
propounder lay precipitated, forgetful of her riddle. But the genial
Themis, 114 forsooth, did not leave such things unrevenged.
Immediately another plague was sent forth against Aonian Thebes; and
many of the peasants fed the savage monster, both by the destruction of
their cattle, and their own as well. We, the neighboring youth, came
together, and enclosed the extensive fields with toils. With a light
bound it leaped over the nets, and passed over the topmost barriers of
the toils that were set. The couples were taken off the dogs, from
which, as they followed, it fled, and eluded them, no otherwise than as
a winged bird. I myself, too, was requested, with eager demands,
for my dog Lælaps [ Tempest ]; that was the name of my
wife’s present. For some time already had he been struggling to get
free from the couples, and strained them with his neck, as they detained
him. Scarce was he well let loose; and yet we could not now tell
where he was; the warm dust had the prints of his feet, but he
himself was snatched from our eyes. A spear does not fly swifter
than he did , nor pellets whirled from the twisted sling, nor the
light arrow from the Gortynian bow. 115 The top of a 288 VII. 779-795 hill, standing in the middle, looks down upon the
plains below. Thither I mount, and I enjoy the sight of an unusual
chase; wherein the wild beast 116 one while seemed to be caught, at
another to 259 VII. 782-799 elude his very bite; and it does not fly in a direct course, and
straight onward, but deceives his mouth, as he pursues it, and returns
in circles, that its enemy may not have his full career against it. He
keeps close to it, and pursues it, a match for him; and though like as if he has caught it, still he fails to
catch it, and vainly snaps at the air. I was now turning to
the resources of my javelin; while my right hand was poising it, and while I was attempting to insert my fingers in the thongs of it , I turned away my eyes; and again I had directed them,
recalled to the same spot, when, most wondrous, I beheld two
marble statues in the middle of the plain; you would think the one was
flying, the other barking in pursuit . Some God undoubtedly, if
any God really did attend to them, desired them both to remain
unconquered in this contest of speed.” EXPLANATION. There were two princes of the name of Cephalus; one, the son of Mercury
and Herse, the daughter of Cecrops; the other, the son of Deïoneus, king
of Phocis, and Diomeda, the daughter of Xuthus. The first was carried
off by Aurora, and went to live with her in Syria; the second married
Procris, the daughter of Erectheus, king of Athens. Though Apollodorus
seems, in the first instance, to follow this genealogy, in his third
book he confounds the actions of those two princes. Ovid and other
writers have spoken only of the son of Deïoneus, who was carried off by
Aurora, and having left her, according to them, returned to Procris. 289 VII. 796-818 FABLE VIII. Procris , jealous of Cephalus, in her
turn, goes to the forest, which she supposes to be the scene of his
infidelity, to surprise him. Hearing the rustling noise which she makes
in the thicket, where she lies concealed, he imagines it is a wild
beast, and, hurling the javelin, which she has formerly given to him, he
kills her. Thus far did he speak ; and then he was silent. “But,” said Phocus, “what fault is there in
that javelin?” whereupon he thus informed him of the demerits of
the javelin. “Let my joys, Phocus, be the first portion of my sorrowful
story. These will I first relate. O son of Æacus, I delight to
remember the happy time, during which, for the first years after my
marriage , I was completely blessed in my wife, and she 260 VII. 799-834 was happy in her husband. A mutual kindness and social love
possessed us both. Neither would she have preferred the bed of Jupiter
before my love; nor was there any woman that could have captivated me,
not even if Venus herself had come. Equal flames fired the
breasts of us both . The Sun striking the tops of the mountains
with his early rays, I was wont generally to go with youthful ardor
into the woods, to hunt; but I neither suffered my servants, nor my
horses, nor my quick-scented hounds to go with me , nor the knotty
nets to attend me; I was safe with my javelin. But when my right
hand was satiated with the slaughter of wild beasts, I betook
myself to the cool spots and the shade, and the breeze which was
breathing forth from the cool valleys. The gentle breeze was sought by
me, in the midst of the heat. For the breeze was I awaiting; that was a
refreshment after my toils: ‘Come, breeze,’ I was wont to sing, for I
remember it full well , ‘and, most grateful, refresh me, and enter
my breast; and, as thou art wont, be willing to assuage the heat with
which I am parched.’ Perhaps I may have added ( for so my destiny
prompted me) many words of endearment, and I may have been accustomed to
say, ‘Thou art my great delight; thou dost refresh and cherish me; thou
makest me to love the woods and lonely haunts, and 290 VII. 819-850 thy breath is ever courted by my face.’ I was not aware that some one
was giving an ear, deceived by these ambiguous words; and thinking the
name of the breeze, so often called upon by me, to be that of a Nymph,
he believed some Nymph was beloved by me. “The rash informer of an imaginary crime immediately went to Procris,
and with his whispering tongue related what he had heard. Love is a
credulous thing. When it was told her, she fell down fainting, with
sudden grief; and coming to, after a long time, she declared that she
was wretched, and born to a cruel destiny; and she complained
about my constancy. Excited by a groundless charge, 117 she dreads that
which, indeed , is nothing; and fears a name without a
body; and, in her wretchedness, grieves as though about a real rival.
Yet she is often in doubt, and, in her extreme wretchedness, hopes she
may be deceived, and denies credit to the information; and unless she
beholds it herself, will not pass sentence upon 261 VII. 834-865 the criminality of her husband. The following light of the morning had
banished the night, when I sallied forth, and sought the woods; and
being victorious in the fields, I said, ‘Come, breeze, and relieve
my pain;’ and suddenly I seemed to hear I know not what groans in the
midst of my words; yet I said, ‘Come hither, most delightful breeze .’ Again, the falling leaves making a gentle noise,
I thought it was a wild beast, and I discharged my flying weapon.
It was Procris; and receiving the wound in the middle of her breast, she
cried out, ‘Ah, wretched me!’ When the voice of my attached wife was
heard, headlong and distracted, I ran towards that voice.
I found her dying, and staining her scattered vestments with blood,
and drawing her own present (ah, wretched me!) from out of her wound;
I lifted up her body, dearer to me than my own, in my guilty arms,
and I bound up her cruel wounds with the garments torn from my bosom;
and I endeavored to stanch the blood, and besought her that she would
not forsake 291 VII. 851-865 me, thus criminal, by her death. She, wanting strength, and now
expiring, forced herself to utter these few words: “‘I suppliantly beseech thee, by the ties of our marriage, and by the
Gods above, and my own Gods, and if I have deserved anything well of
thee, by that as well , and by the cause of my death, my love even
now enduring, while I am perishing, do not allow the Nymph Aura
[ breeze ] to share with thee my marriage ties.’ She thus spoke; and then, at last, I perceived the mistake of the name, and
informed her of it. But what avails informing her? She sinks; and her
little strength flies, together with her blood. And so long as she can
look on anything, she gazes on me, and breathes out upon me, on my
face, 118 her unhappy life; but she seems to die free from
care, and with a more contented look.” In tears, the hero is relating these things to them, as they weep,
and, lo! Æacus enters, with his two sons, 119 and his soldiers
newly levied; which Cephalus received, furnished with valorous
arms. 262 EXPLANATION. The love which Cephalus, the son of Deïoneus, bore for the chase,
causing him to rise early in the morning for the enjoyment of his sport,
was the origin of the story of his love for Aurora. His wife, Procris,
as Apollodorus tells us, carried on an amour with Pteleon, and, probably,
caused that report to be spread abroad, to divert attention from her own
intrigue. Cephalus, suspecting his wife’s infidelity, she fled to the
court of the second Minos, king of Crete, who fell in love with her.
Having, thereby, incurred the resentment of Pasiphaë, who adopted
several methods to destroy her rival, and, among others, spread poison
in her bed, she left Crete, and returned to Thoricus, the place of her
former residence, where she was reconciled to Cephalus, and gave him the
celebrated dog and javelin mentioned by Ovid. The poets tell us, that this dog was made by Vulcan, and presented by
him to Jupiter, who gave him to Europa; and that coming to the hands of
her son Minos, he presented it to Procris. The wild beast, which ravaged
the country, and was pursued by 292 the dog of Procris, and which some writers tell us was a monstrous fox,
was probably a pirate or sea robber; and being, perhaps, pursued by some
Cretan officer of Minos, who escorted Procris back to her country, on
their vessels being shipwrecked near some rocks, it gave occasion to the
story that the dog and the monster had been changed into stone. Indeed,
Tzetzes says distinctly, that the dog was called Cyon, and the monster,
or fox, Alopis; and he also says that Cyon was the captain who brought
Procris back from Crete. It being believed that resentment had some
share in causing the death of Procris, the court of the Areiopagus
condemned Cephalus to perpetual banishment. The island of Cephalenia,
which received its name from him, having been given to him by
Amphitryon, he retired to it, where his son Celeus afterwards succeeded
him. 1. The Minyæ. ]—Ver. 1. The Argonauts. The Minyæ were a people
of Thessaly, so called from Minyas, the son of Orchomenus. 2. Pagasæan ship. ]—Ver. 1. Pagasæ was a seaport of Thessaly,
at the foot of Mount Pelion, where the ship Argo was built. 3. Distressed old man. ]—Ver. 4. Clarke translates ‘miseri
senis ore,’ ‘from the mouth of the miserable old fellow.’ 4. Daughter of Æetes. ]—Ver. 9. Medea was the daughter of
Æetes, the king of Colchis. Juno, favoring Jason, had persuaded Venus to
inspire Medea with love for him. 5. Haste then. ]—Ver. 47. Clarke translates ‘accingere,’ more
literally than elegantly, ‘buckle to.’ 6. Pelasgian cities. ]—Ver. 49. Pelasgia was properly that part
of Greece which was afterwards called Thessaly. The province of
Pelasgiotis, in Thessaly, afterwards retained its name, which was
derived from the Pelasgi, an early people of Greece. Pliny informs us
that Peloponnesus at first had the names of ‘Apia’ and ‘Pelasgia.’ Some
suppose that the Pelasgi derived their name from Pelasgus, the son of
Jupiter; while other writers assert that they were so called from πελαργοὶ , ‘storks,’ from their
wandering habits. The name is frequently used, as in the present
instance, to signify the whole of the Greeks. 7. My sister. ]—Ver. 51. Her sister was Chalciope, who had
married Phryxus, after his arrival in Colchis. Her children being found
by Jason, in the isle of Dia, they came with him to Colchis, and
presented him to their mother, who afterwards commended him to the care
of Medea. 8. And my brother. ]—Ver. 51. Her brother was Absyrtus, whose
tragical death is afterwards mentioned. 9. Is barbarous. ]—Ver. 53. It was certainly ‘barbara’ in the
eyes of a Greek; but the argument sounds rather oddly in the mouth of
Medea, herself a native of the country. 10. The youth of Greece. ]—Ver. 56. These were the Argonauts,
who were selected from the most noble youths of Greece. 11. What mountains. ]—Ver. 63. These were the Cyanean rocks, or
Symplegades, at the mouth of the Euxine sea. 12. Hecate. ]—Ver. 74. Ancient writers seem to have been much
divided in opinion who Hecate was. Ovid here follows the account which
made her to be the daughter of Perses, who, according to Diodorus
Siculus, was the son of Phœbus, and the brother of Æetes. Marrying her
uncle Æetes, she is said to have been the mother of Circe, Medea, and
Absyrtus. By some writers she is confounded with the Moon and with
Proserpine; as identical with the Moon, she has the epithets ‘Triceps’
and ‘Triformis,’ often given to her by the poets, because the Moon
sometimes is full, sometimes disappears, and often shows but part of her
disk. 13. And by the sire. ]—Ver. 96. Allusion is made to the Sun, who
was said to be the father of Æetes, the destined father-in-law of
Jason. 14. Breathe forth flames. ]—Ver. 104. The name of the God of
fire is here used to signify that element. Apollodorus says, that Medea
gave Jason a drug ( φάρμακον ) to rub over himself and his armor. 15. Or when flints. ]—Ver. 107. It is difficult to determine
whether ‘silices’ here means ‘flint-stones,’ or ‘lime-stone;’ probably
the latter, from the mention of water sprinkled over them. If the
meaning is ‘flint-stones,’ the passage may refer to the manufacture of
glass, with the art of making which the ancients were perfectly
acquainted. 16. Unused to it. ]—Ver. 119. Because, being sacred to Mars, it
was not permitted to be ploughed. 17. Dragon’s teeth. ]—Ver. 122. These were a portion of the
teeth of the dragon slain by Cadmus, which Mars and Minerva had sent to
Æetes. 18. Lethæan juice. ]—Ver. 152. Lethe was a river of the infernal
regions, whose waters were said to produce sleep and forgetfulness. 19. Port of Iolcos. ]—Ver. 158. Iolcos was a city of Thessaly,
of which country Jason was a native. 20. Of the triple form. ]—Ver. 177. Hecate, the Goddess of
enchantment. 21. With bare feet. ]—Ver. 183. To have the feet bare was
esteemed requisite for the due performance of magic rites, though
sometimes on such occasions, and probably in the present instance, only
one foot was left unshod. In times of drought, according to Tertullian,
a procession and ceremonial, called ‘nudipedalia,’ were resorted
to, with a view to propitiate the Gods by this token of grief and
humiliation. 22. Three-faced Hecate. ]—Ver. 194. Though Hecate and the Moon
are here mentioned as distinct, they are frequently considered to have
been the same Deity, with different attributes. The three heads with
which Hecate was represented were those of a horse, a dog, and a
pig, or sometimes, in the place of the latter, a human head. 23. Temesæan. ]—Ver. 207. Temesa was a town of the Brutii, on
the coast of Etruria, famous for its copper mines. It was also sometimes
called Tempsa. There was also another Temesa, a city of Cyprus,
also famous for its copper. 24. Chalky regions. ]—Ver. 223. Such was the characteristic of
the mountainous country of Thessaly, where she now alighted. 25. Brazen sickle. ]—Ver. 227. We learn from Macrobius and
Cælius Rhodiginus that copper was preferred to iron in cutting herbs for
the purposes of enchantment, in exorcising spirits, and in aiding the
moon in eclipses against the supposed charms of the witches, because it
was supposed to be a purer metal. 26. Apidanus. ]—Ver. 228. This and Amphrysus were rivers of
Thessaly. 27. Shores of Bœbe. ]—Ver. 231. Strabo makes mention of lake
Bœbeis, near the town of Bœbe, in Thessaly. It was not far from the
mouth of the river Peneus. 28. Anthedon. ]—Ver. 232. This was a town of Bœotia, opposite to
Eubœa, being situated on the Euripus, now called the straits of
Negropont. 29. Glaucus. ]—Ver. 233. He was a fisherman, who was changed
into a sea God, on tasting a certain herb. His story is related at the
end of the 13th Book. 30. Ninth day. ]—Ver. 234. The numbers three and nine seem to
have been deemed of especial virtue in incantations. 31. One to youth. ]—Ver. 241. This goddess was also called Hebe,
from the Greek word signifying youth. She was the daughter of Juno, and
the wife of Hercules. She was also the cup-bearer of the Gods, until she
was supplanted by Ganymede. 32. Goblets. ]—Ver. 246. ‘Carchesia.’ The ‘carchesium’ was a
kind of drinking cup, used by the Greeks from very early times. It was
slightly contracted in the middle, and its two handles extended from the
top to the bottom. It was employed in the worship of the Deities, and
was used for libations of blood, wine, milk, and honey. Macrobius says
that it was only used by the Greeks. Virgil makes mention of it as used
to hold wine. 33. King of the shades. ]—Ver. 249. Pluto and Proserpine. Clarke
translates this line and the next, ‘And prays to the king of shades with
his kidnapped wife, that they would not be too forward to deprive the
limbs of the old gentleman of life.’ 34. Thrice does she. ]—Ver. 261. Clarke thus renders this and
the two following lines: ‘And purifies the old gentleman three times
with flame, three times with water, and three times with sulphur. In the
meantime the strong medicine boils, and bounces about in a brazen kettle
set on the fire.’ 35. The potent mixture. ]—Ver. 262. This reminds us of the line
of Shakespeare in Macbeth, ‘Make the hell-broth thick and slab.’ 36. A screech owl. ]—Ver. 269. ‘Strigis.’ The ‘strix’ is
supposed to have been the screech owl, and was a favorite bird with the
enchanters, who were supposed to have the power of assuming that form.
From the description given of the ‘striges’ in the Sixth Book of the
Fasti, it would almost appear that the qualities of the vampyre bat were
attributed to them. 37. Water snake. ]—Ver. 272. The ‘chelydrus’ was a venomous
water-snake of a powerful and offensive smell. The Delphin Commentator
seems to think that a kind of turtle is here meant. 38. Long-lived stag. ]—Ver. 273. The stag was said to live four
times, and the crow nine times, as long as man. 39. Opened the throat. ]—Ver. 285-6. Clarke translates the words
‘quod simul ac vidit, stricto Medea recludit Ense senis jugulum,’ ‘which
as soon as Medea saw, she opens the throat of the old gentleman with a
drawn sword.’ 40. And his hair. ]—Ver. 288. Medea is thought by some writers
not only to have discovered a dye for giving a dark color to grey hair,
but to have found out the invigorating properties of the warm bath. 41. To his nurses. ]—Ver. 295. These (in Book iii. l. 314.) he
calls by the name of Nyseïdes; but in the Fifth Book of the Fasti they
are styled Hyades, and are placed in the number of the Constellations.
A commentator on Homer, quoting from Pherecydes, calls them
‘Dodonides.’ 42. Daughter of Æetes. ]—Ver. 296. The reading in most of the
MSS. here is Tetheiâ, or ‘Thetide;’ but Burmann has replaced it by
Æetide, ‘the daughter of Æetes.’ It has been justly remarked, why should
Bacchus apply to Tethys to have the age of the Nymphs, who had nursed
him, renewed, when he had just beheld Medea, and not Tethys, do it in
favor of Æson? 43. That her arts. ]—Ver. 297. ‘Neve doli cessent’ is translated
by Clarke, ‘and that her tricks might not cease.’ 44. Pelias. ]—Ver. 298. He was the brother of Æson, and had
dethroned him, and usurped his kingdom. 45. The Iberian sea. ]—Ver. 324. The Atlantic, or Western Ocean,
is thus called from Iberia, the ancient name of Spain; which country,
perhaps, was so called from the river Iberus, or Ebro, flowing through
it. 46. Lofty habitation. ]—Ver. 352. The mountains of Thessaly are
so called, because Chiron, the son of the Nymph Phillyra, lived
there. 47. Cerambus. ]—Ver. 353. Antoninus Liberalis, quoting from
Nicander, calls him Terambus, and says that he lived at the foot of
Mount Pelion; he incurred the resentment of the Nymphs, who changed him
into a scarabæus, or winged beetle. Flying to the heights of Parnassus,
at the time of the flood of Deucalion, he thereby made his escape. Some
writers say that he was changed into a bird. 48. Pitane. ]—Ver. 357. This was a town of Ætolia, in Asia
Minor, near the mouth of the river Caicus. 49. The long dragon. ]—Ver. 358. He alludes, most probably, to
the story of the Lesbian changed into a dragon or serpent, which is
mentioned in the Eleventh book, line 58. 50. Wood of Ida. ]—Ver. 359. This was the grove of Ida, in
Phrygia. It is supposed that he refers to the story of Thyoneus, the son
of Bacchus, who, having stolen an ox from some Phrygian shepherds, was
pursued by them; on which Bacchus, to screen his son, changed the ox
into a stag, and invested Thyoneus with the garb of a hunter. 51. Father of Corythus. ]—Ver. 361. Paris was the father of
Corythus, by Œnone. He was said to have been buried at Cebrena,
a little town of Phrygia, near Troy. 52. Mæra. ]—Ver. 362. This was the name of the dog of Icarius,
the father of Erigone, who discovered the murder of his master by the
shepherds of Attica, and was made a Constellation, under the name of the
Dog-star. As, however, the flight of Medea was now far distant from
Attica, it is more likely that the Poet refers to the transformation of
some female, named Mæra, into a dog, whose story has not come down to
us; indeed, Lactantius expresses this as his opinion. Burmann thinks
that it refers to the transformation of Hecuba, mentioned in the 13th
book, line 406; and that ‘Mæra’ is a corruption for some other name of
Hecuba. 53. Eurypylus. ]—Ver. 363. He was a former king of the Isle of
Cos, in the Ægean Sea, and was much famed for his skill as an augur. 54. The Coan matrons. ]—Ver. 363. Lactantius says that the women
of Cos, extolling their own beauty as superior to that of Venus,
incurred the resentment of that Goddess, and were changed by her into
cows. Another version of the story is, that these women, being offended
at Hercules for driving the oxen of Ægeon through their island, were
very abusive, on which Juno transformed them into cows: to this latter
version reference is made in the present passage. 55. Hercules. ]—Ver. 364. He besieged and took the chief city of
the island, which was also called Cos; and having slain Eurypylus,
carried off his daughter Chalciope. 56. Phœbean Rhodes. ]—Ver. 365. The island of Rhodes, in the
Mediterranean, off the coast of Asia Minor, was sacred to the Sun, and
was said never to be deserted by his rays. 57. Ialysian Telchines. ]—Ver. 365. Ialysus was one of the three
most ancient cities of Rhodes, and was said to have been founded by
Ialysus, whose parent was the Sun. The Telchines, or Thelchines, were a
race supposed to have migrated thither from Crete. They were persons of
great artistic skill, on which account they may, possibly, have obtained
the character of being magicians; such was the belief of Strabo. 58. Whose eyes. ]—Ver. 366. The evil eye was supposed by the
ancients not only to have certain fascinating powers, but to be able to
destroy the beauty of any object on which it was turned. 59. Cea. ]—Ver. 368. This island, now Zia, is in the Ægean sea,
near Eubœa. Carthæa was a city there, the ruins of which are still in
existence. 60. Alcidamas. ]—Ver. 369. Antoninus Liberalis says, that
Alcidamas lived not at Carthæa, but at Iülis, another city in the Isle
of Cea. 61. Lakes of Hyrie. ]—Ver. 371. Hyrie was the mother of Cycnus;
and pining away with grief on the transformation of her son, she was
changed into a lake, called by her name. 62. Cycneian Tempe. ]—Ver. 371. This was not Thessalian Tempe,
but a valley of Teumesia, or Teumesus, a mountain of Bœotia. 63. Pleuron. ]—Ver. 382. This was a city of Ætolia, near Mount
Curius. It was far distant from Bœotia and Lake Hyrie. Some
commentators, therefore, suggest that the reading should be Brauron,
a village of Attica, near the confines of Bœotia. 64. Combe. ]—Ver. 383. She was the mother of the Curetes of
Ætolia, who, perhaps, received that name from Mount Curius. There was
another Combe, the daughter of Asopus, who discovered the use of brazen
arms, and was called Chalcis, from that circumstance. She was said to
have borne a hundred daughters to her husband. 65. Calaurea. ]—Ver. 384. This was an island between Crete and
the Peloponnesus, in the Saronic gulf, which was sacred to Apollo.
Latona resided there, having given Delos to Neptune in exchange for it.
Demosthenes died there. 66. Menephron. ]—Ver. 386. Hyginus says, that he committed
incest both with his mother Blias, and with Cyllene, his daughter. 67. Cephisus. ]—Ver. 388. The river Cephisus, in Bœotia, had a
daughter, Praxithea. She was the wife of Erectheus, and bore him eight
sons, the fate of one of whom is perhaps here referred to. 68. Eumelus. ]—Ver. 390. He was the king of Patræ, on the
sea-coast of Achaia. Triptolemus visited him with his winged chariot; on
which, Antheas, the son of Eumelus, ascended it while his father was
sleeping, and falling from it, he was killed. He is, probably, here
referred to; and the reading should be ‘natum,’ and not ‘natam.’ Some
writers, however, suppose that his daughter was changed into a bird. 69. Pirenian Ephyre. ]—Ver. 391. Corinth was so called from
Ephyre, the daughter of Neptune, who was said to have lived there. Its
inhabitants were fabled to have sprung from mushrooms. 70. Titanian dragons. ]—Ver. 398. Her dragons are so called,
either because, as Pindar says, they had sprung from the blood of the
Titans, or because, according to the Greek tradition, the chariot and
winged dragons had been sent to Medea by the Sun, one of whose names was
Titan. 71. Phineus. ]—Ver. 399. Any further particulars of the person
here named are unknown. Some commentators suggest ‘Phini,’ and that some
female of the name of Phinis is alluded to, making the adjective
‘justissime’ of the feminine gender. 72. Periphas. ]—Ver. 400. He was a very ancient king of Attica,
before the time of Cecrops, and was said to have been changed into an
eagle by Jupiter, while his wife was transformed into an osprey. 73. Polypemon. ]—Ver. 401. This was a name of the robber
Procrustes, who was slain by Theseus. Halcyone, the daughter of his son
Scyron, having been guilty of incontinence, was thrown into the sea by
her father, on which she was changed into a kingfisher, which bore her
name. 74. A gloomy cave. ]—Ver. 409. This cavern was called Acherusia.
It was situate in the country of the Mariandyni, near the city of
Heraclea, in Pontus, and was said to be the entrance of the Infernal
Regions. Cerberus was said to have been dragged from Tartarus by Hercules ,
through this cave, which circumstance was supposed to account for the
quantity of aconite, or wolfsbane, that grew there. 75. Call it aconite. ]—Ver. 419. From the Greek ακόνη , ‘a whetstone.’ 76. Presented to his son. ]—Ver. 420. Medea was anxious to
secure the succession to the throne of Athens to her son Medus, and was
therefore desirous to remove Theseus out of the way. 77. Tokens of his race. ]—Ver. 423. Ægeus, leaving Æthra at
Trœzen, in a state of pregnancy, charged her, if she bore a son, to rear
him, but to tell no one whose son he was. He placed his own sword and
shoes under a large stone, and directed her to send his son to him when
he was able to lift the stone, and to take them from under it; and he
then returned to Athens, where he married Medea. When Theseus had grown
to the proper age, his mother led him to the stone under which his
father had deposited his sword and shoes, which he raised with ease, and
took them out. It was, probably, by means of this sword that Ægeus
recognized his son in the manner mentioned in the text. 78. Marathon. ]—Ver. 434. This was a town of Attica, adjoining a
plain of the same name, where the Athenians, under the command of
Miltiades, overthrew the Persians with immense slaughter. The bull which
Theseus slew there was presented by Neptune to Minos. Being brought into
Attica by Hercules, it laid waste that territory until it was slain by
Theseus. 79. Cromyon. ]—Ver. 435. This was a village of the Corinthian
territory, which was infested by a wild boar of enormous size, that slew
both men and animals. It was put to death by Theseus. 80. Vulcan. ]—Ver. 437. By Antilia, Vulcan was the father of
Periphetes, a robber who infested Epidaurus, in the Peloponnesus.
He was so formidable with his club, that he was called Corynetas, from κορύνη , the Greek for ‘a
club.’ 81. Cephisus. ]—Ver. 438. Procrustes was a robber of such
extreme cruelty that he used to stretch out, or lop off, the extremities
of his captives, according as they were shorter or longer than his
bedstead. He infested the neighborhood of Eleusis, in Attica, which was
watered by the Cephisus. He was put to death by Theseus. 82. Cercyon. ]—Ver. 439. It was his custom to challenge
travellers to wrestle, and to kill them, if they declined the contest,
or were beaten in it. Theseus accepted his challenge; and having
overcome him, put him to death. Eleusis was especially dedicated to
Ceres; there the famous Eleusinian mysteries of that Goddess were
held. 83. Sinnis. ]—Ver. 440. He was a robber of Attica, to whom
reference is made in the Ibis, line 409. 84. Alcathoë. ]—Ver. 443. Megara, or Alcathoë, which was founded
by Lelex, was almost destroyed by Minos, and was rebuilt by Alcathoüs,
the son of Pelops. He, flying from his father, on being accused of the
murder of his brother Chrysippus, retired to the city of Megara, where,
having slain a lion which was then laying waste that territory, he was
held in the highest veneration by the inhabitants. 85. Scyron. ]—Ver. 443. This robber haunted the rocks in the
neighborhood of Megara, and used to insist on those who became his
guests washing his feet. This being done upon the rocks, Scyron used to
kick the strangers into the sea while so occupied, where a tortoise lay
ready to devour the bodies. Theseus killed him, and threw his body down
the same rocks, which derived their name of Saronic, or Scyronic, from
this robber. 86. Anaphe . ]—Ver. 461. This, and the other islands
here named, were near the isle of Crete, and perhaps in those times were
subject to the sway of Minos. 87. Cimolus. ]—Ver. 463. Pliny the Elder tells us, that this
island was famous for producing a clay which seems to have had much the
properties of soap. It was of a grayish white color, and was also
employed for medicinal purposes. 88. Seriphos. ]—Ver. 464. Commentators are at a loss to know why
Seriphos should here have the epithet ‘plana,’ ‘level,’ inasmuch as it
was a very craggy island. It is probably a corrupt reading. 89. Sithonian. ]—Ver. 466. This was Arne, whose story is
referred to in the Explanation , p. 242 ( p. 270 ). 90. Oliaros. ]—Ver. 469. This was one of the Cyclades, in the
Ægean sea; it was colonized by the Sidonians. 91. Tenos. ]—Ver. 469. This island was famous for a temple
there, sacred to Neptune. 92. Andros. ]—Ver. 469. This was an island in the Ægean Sea,
near Eubœa. It received its name from Andros, the son of Anius. The
Andrian slave, who gives his name to one of the comedies of Terence, was
supposed to be a native of this island. 93. Gyaros. ]—Ver. 470. This was a sterile island among the
Cyclades; in later times, the Romans made it a penal settlement for
their criminals. The mice of this island were said to be able to gnaw
iron; perhaps, because they were starved by reason of its
unfruitfulness. 94. Smooth olive. ]—Ver. 470. Clarke translates ‘nitidæ olivæ’
‘the neat olive.’ ‘Nitidus’ here means ‘smooth and shining.’ 95. Œnopia. ]—Ver. 473. This was the ancient name of the isle of
Ægina, in the Saronic Gulf, famous as being the native place of the
family of the Æacidæ. It obtained its later name from Ægina, the
daughter of Asopus, and the mother of Æacus, whom Jupiter carried
thither. 96. Telamon. ]—Ver. 476. Telamon, Peleus, and Phocus, were the
three sons of Æacus. 97. Lyctian. ]—Ver. 490. Lyctus was the name of one of the
cities of Crete. 98. Pallas. ]—Ver. 500. This was either Pallas the son of
Pandion, king of Athens, or of Neleus, the brother of Theseus. This
Pallas, together with his sons, was afterwards slain by Theseus. 99. Cephalus. ]—Ver. 512. He was the son of Deioneus, or
according to some writers, of Mercury and Herse, the daughter of
Cecrops. 100. Long preamble. ]—Ver. 520. Clarke translates ‘neu longâ
ambage morer vos,’ ‘that I may not detain you with a long-winded detail
of it.’ 101. Country named. ]—Ver. 524. This was the island of Ægina, so
called from the Nymph who was carried thither by Jupiter. 102. Bowels are scorched. ]—Ver. 554. Clarke quaintly renders the
words ‘viscera torrentur primo.’ ‘first people’s bowels are searched;’
perhaps, however, the latter word is a misprint for ‘scorched.’ 103. Thou seest. ]—Ver. 587. As Æacus says this, he must be
supposed to point with his finger towards the temple. 104. More odious. ]—Ver. 603. Dead bodies were supposed to be
particularly offensive to the Gods. 105. From Dodona. ]—Ver. 623. Dodona was a town of Chaonia, in
Epirus, so called from Dodone, the daughter of Jupiter and Europa. Near
it was a temple and a wood sacred to Jupiter, which was famous for the
number and magnitude of its oaks. Doves were said to give oracular
responses there, probably from the circumstance that the female
soothsayers of Thessaly were called πελειαδαι A . Some writers, however, say that the
oaks had the gift of speech, combined with that of prophesying. 106. Myrmidons. ]—Ver. 654. From the Greek word μύρμηξ , ‘an ant;’ according to this
version of the story. 107. Æolus. ]—Ver. 672. Apollodorus reckons Deioneus, the parent
of Cephalus, among the children of Apollo. 108. Nereian youth. ]—Ver. 685. Phocus, who was the son of Æacus,
by Psamathe, the daughter of Nereus. 109. Orithyïa. ]—Ver. 695. She was the daughter of Erectheus,
king of Athens, and was carried off by Boreas, as already stated. 110. Hymettus. ]—Ver. 702. This was a mountain of Attica, famous
for its honey and its marble. 111. To make attempts. ]—Ver. 721. Tzetzes informs us that she
was found by her husband in company with a young man named Pteleon, who
had made her a present of a golden wreath. Antoninus Liberalis says,
that her husband tried her fidelity by offering her a bribe, through the
medium of a slave. 112. Used to wander. ]—Ver. 746. Some writers say that she fled
to Crete, on which, Diana, who was aware of the attachment of Aurora for
her husband, made her a present of a javelin, which no person could
escape; and gave her the dog Lælaps, which no wild beast could outrun.
Such is the version given by Hyginus. But Apollodorus and Antoninus
Liberalis say, that she fled to Minos, who, prevailing over her virtue,
made her a present of the dog and the javelin. Afterwards, presenting
herself before her husband, disguised as a huntress, she gave him proofs
of the efficacy of them; and upon his requesting her to give them to
him, she exacted, as a condition, what must, apparently, have resulted
in a breach of the laws of conjugal fidelity. On his assenting to the
proposal, she discovered herself, and afterwards made him the presents
which he desired. 113. The son of Laius. ]—Ver. 759. Œdipus was the son of Laius,
king of Thebes. The Sphinx was a monster, the offspring of Typhon and
Echidna, which haunted a mountain near Thebes. Œdipus solved the riddle
which it proposed for solution, on which the monster precipitated itself
from a rock. It had the face of a woman, the wings of a bird, and the
extremities of a lion. 114. Genial Themis. ]—Ver. 762. Themis had a very ancient oracle
in Bœotia. 115. Gortynian bow. ]—Ver. 778. Crete was called Gortynian, from
Gortys or Gortyna, one of its cities, which was famous for the skill of
its inhabitants in archery. 116. The wild beast. ]—Ver. 782. Antoninus Liberalis and
Apollodorus say that this was a fox, which was called ‘the Teumesian,’
from Teumesus, a mountain of Bœotia, and that the Thebans, to
appease its voracity, were wont to give it a child to devour every
month. Palæphatus says that it was not a wild beast, but a man called
Alopis. 117. Groundless charge. ]—Ver. 829. Possibly, Ovid may intend to
imply that her jealousy received an additional stimulus from the
similarity of the name ‘Aura’ to that of her former rival, Aurora. 118. On my face. ]—Ver. 861. He alludes to the prevalent custom
of catching the breath of the dying person in the mouth. 119. His two sons. ]—Ver. 864. These were Telamon and Peleus, who
had levied these troops. Supplementary Note ( added by transcriber ) A. the female soothsayers of Thessaly were called πελειαδαι . Text unchanged, but the
intended form was probably πελειάδες . More about the texts Ovid’s Metamorphoses , translated by Henry Thomas Riley
(1816-1878, B.A. 1840, M.A. 1859), was originally published in 1851 as
part of Bohn’s Classical Library. This e-text, covering Books I-VII, is
based on two reprints: George Bell (London, 1893, one volume). This edition describes itself as
“reprinted from the stereotype plates”. These may have been the original
1851 plates; the Classical Library was sold to Bell & Daldy,
later George Bell. David McKay (Philadelphia, 1899, two volumes), with introduction by
Edward Brooks. The introductory material from the Bell/Bohn edition is
absent. This edition was freshly typeset, correcting a few errors in the
Bell/Bohn edition but also introducing a number of new errors. The McKay edition was the “base” of the e-text. The scanned,
proofread text was computer-checked against the text of the Bell
edition, and differences were in turn checked against page images of the
printed books. Where appropriate, the text was checked against one or
more versions of the Latin original. Most differences are trivial. McKay
uses American spelling such as “honor” for “honour”, and compound forms
such as “northwest” for “north-west”; punctuation is often changed,
though some apparent variations may be due to the quality of printing
and reproduction. Note that the title page of the Bell edition lists the translator as
“Henry T. Riley, B.A.”, while the McKay edition has “M.A.” The sequence
of dates—original publication 1851, Riley M.A. 1859, reprint
1893—supports the idea that the Bell edition is a strict
facsimile. Errors and Variations Changes to the text are shown with mouse-hover popups, marked
in three ways: —Errors shared by both editions . —Errors introduced in the McKay edition . This is the largest group; in
particular, the typesetter appears not to have known Greek, and had
trouble distinguishing between œ and æ . Unless otherwise
noted, the Bell version was treated as the correct form. — Errors in the Bell/Bohn edition corrected in McKay, and variant readings where
the McKay text was used. Variant readings are “wrong” in the sense that
they are different from what is found in the Bell/Bohn text, but they
are acceptable translations of the Latin. Italics in the translation—shown with braces { } in
the correction popups—are considered non-trivial because they
indicate text added by the translator, not present in the Latin
original. More complex errors and ambiguities are addressed in
supplementary footnotes marked by letters: A, B .
Numbered footnotes are from the original text. Dieresis is unpredictable in both editions; forms such as
“Phaeton”, “Ocyrrhöe” and “Danäe” are common, and have been silently
corrected. Since the ligatures “æ” and “œ” are used consistently,
dieresis can be assumed even when not explicitly indicated. The translator used a number of less common name forms and variant
spellings: Cæus, Calisto, Lilybœus, Phyale, Phryxus, Progne: The original, Greek-derived forms are Cœus (Κοιος), Callisto (Καλλιστω),
Lilybæus (Λιλυβαιος), Phiale (Φιαλη), Phrixus (Φριξος), Procne (Προκνη).
Note that in the main text, the name “Callisto” is never used, probably
on metrical grounds. Damasicthon, Erectheus and similar : Spellings in “-cth-” are used consistently in place of “-chth-” (Greek
-χθ-). The pairs Achæa/Achaia, Ethiopia/Æthiopia, Phocea/Phocæa,
Proserpine/Proserpina all occur, with the McKay text following Bell in
all cases. Footnote Numbering In the original text, footnote numbers began from 1 in each Book, and
started over when the count passed 99. Almost all Books had duplications
in the sequence, usually in the form “17*”. There were no changes
between the two editions. In this e-text, footnotes have been renumbered
consecutively within each Book, without duplication; Books I and VII
continue past 100. Interpolations: Bk. I 51*, 67* Bk. II 4*, 71* Bk. III 72*, 88* Bk. IV 17*, 37*, 77* Bk. V 46*, 76* Bk. VI no change from original sequence Bk. VII 4*, 73*, 2* (second series)
THE METAMORPHOSES OF OVID *** This e-text covers the second half, Books VIII-XV, of Henry T. Riley’s 1851
translation of Ovid’s Metamorphoses. The first half, Books I-VII, is already
available from Project Gutenberg as e-text 21765 .
Note that this text, unlike the earlier one, is based solely on the 1893 George
Bell reprint. The text includes characters that will only display in UTF-8
(Unicode) file encoding, including Greek words in the Notes: œ, Œ (oe ligature) κείρω, ἀκονιτὶ If any of these characters do not display properly, or if the
apostrophes and quotation marks in this paragraph appear as
garbage, you may have an incompatible browser or unavailable fonts.
First, make sure that the browser’s “character set” or “file encoding”
is set to Unicode (UTF-8). You may also need to change your browser’s
default font. All Greek words have mouse-hover transliterations: Δηοῦς κόρη . More information on the text , including line numbering , errors and
variations , and details of footnote
numbering , are given at the end of this file. References to Clarke
in Transcriber’s Notes are from the third edition (1752). THE METAMORPHOSES OF OVI D. LITERALLY TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PROSE, WITH COPIOUS NOTES AND EXPLANATIONS, BY HENRY T. RILEY, B.A. OF CLARE HALL, CAMBRIDGE. LONDON: GEORGE BELL & SONS, YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN, AND NEW YORK. 1893. LONDON: REPRINTED FROM THE STEREOTYPE PLATES BY WM. CLOWES & SONS, LTD., STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS. Fable descriptions are taken from the translator’s Synopses. Introduction Book VIII Fable I : Minos and Scylla Fable II : Theseus and the Minotaur Fable III : Dædalus and Icarus Fable IV : Meleager and the Calydonian Boar Fable V : Acheloüs tells the five Naiads’ stories Fable VI : Baucis and Philemon; the transformations of Proteus Fable VII : Erisicthon’s hunger Book IX Fable I : Hercules defeats Acheloüs to win Deïanira Fable II : Nessus and the death of Hercules Fable III : Galanthis and the birth of Hercules Fable IV : Lotis, Dryope and Iolaüs Fable V : Caunus and Byblis Fable VI : Iphis and Ianthe Book X Fable I : Orpheus and Eurydice Fable II : Orpheus sings to the rocks and trees; the transformation of Attis Fable III : Cyparissus Fable IV : Jupiter and Ganymede Fable V : Apollo accidentally kills Hyacinthus Fable VI : the Cerastæ and the Propœtides Fable VII : Pygmalion’s statue Fable VIII : Cinyras, Myrrha and the birth of Adonis Fable IX : Venus and Adonis; Hippomenes and Atalanta Fable X : the death of Adonis Book XI Fable I : the Thracian women kill Orpheus Fable II : Midas’s golden touch Fable III : the contest of Pan and Apollo; Midas’s ears Fable IV : the walls of Troy Fables V and VI : Peleus and Thetis; assorted transformations Fable VII : the shipwreck of Ceyx Fable VIII : Hesperia and Æsacus Book XII Fables I and II : the Greeks sail for Troy; the sacrifice of Iphigenia Fables III and IV : Cænis becomes Cæneus; the battle of the Lapithæ and Centaurs Fables V and VI : Periclymenus; the death of Achilles Book XIII Fable I : Ajax and Ulysses fight for Achilles’s armor; the fall of Troy Fables III and IV : the sacrifice of Polyxena; the funeral of Memnon Fables V and VI : Æneas leaves Troy; the daughters of Anius and Orion Fable VII : Polyphemus kills Acis Fable VIII : Glaucus Book XIV Fable I : Circe, Glaucus and Scylla Fable II : Dido and Æneas; the Cercopes Fable III : Apollo and the Sibyl Fable IV : Ulysses receives Æolus’s bag of winds Fable V : Circe turns Ulysses’s men into swine Fable VI : Circe, Pictus and Canens Fables VII and VIII : the followers of Diomedes; the Apulian shepherd Fables IX and X : the fleet of Æneas; the death of Turnus Fable XI : Vertumnus and Pomona Fables XII and XIII : Anaxarete; Romulus builds Rome Book XV Fable I : Myscelos builds Crotona Fables II and III : Pythagoras teaches Numa Fables IV, V and VI : the transformations of Egeria, Hippolytus and others Fable VII : Æsculapius comes to Rome Fable VIII : the assassination of Julius Cæsar The Introduction is included here for completeness. The
Synopses of Books I-VII have been omitted. iii INTRODUCTION. The Metamorphoses of Ovid are a
compendium of the Mythological narratives of ancient Greece and Rome, so
ingeniously framed, as to embrace a large amount of information upon
almost every subject connected with the learning, traditions, manners,
and customs of antiquity, and have afforded a fertile field of
investigation to the learned of the civilized world. To present to the
public a faithful translation of a work, universally esteemed, not only
for its varied information, but as being the masterpiece of one of the
greatest Poets of ancient Rome, is the object of the present volume. To render the work, which, from its nature and design, must, of
necessity, be replete with matter of obscure meaning, more inviting to
the scholar, and more intelligible to those who are unversed in
Classical literature, the translation is accompanied with Notes and
Explanations, which, it is believed, will be found to throw considerable
light upon the origin and meaning of some of the traditions of heathen
Mythology. In the translation, the text of the Delphin edition has been
generally adopted; and no deviation has been made from it, except in a
few instances, where the reason for such a step is stated in the notes;
at the same time, the texts of Burmann and Gierig have throughout been
carefully consulted. The several editions vary materially in respect to
punctuation; the Translator has consequently used his own discretion in
adopting that which seemed to him the most fully to convey in each
passage the intended meaning of the writer. The Metamorphoses of Ovid have been frequently translated into the
English language. On referring to Mr. Bohn’s excellent Catalogue of the
Greek and Latin Classics and their Translations, we find that the whole
of the work has been twice translated into English Prose, while five
translations in Verse are there enumerated. A prose version of the
Metamorphoses was published by Joseph Davidson , about the iv middle of the last century, which professes to be “as near the original
as the different idioms of the Latin and English will allow;” and to be
“printed for the use of schools, as well as of private gentlemen.”
A few moments’ perusal of this work will satisfy the reader that it
has not the slightest pretension to be considered a literal translation,
while, by its departure from the strict letter of the author, it has
gained nothing in elegance of diction. It is accompanied by “critical,
historical, geographical, and classical notes in English, from the best
Commentators, both ancient and modern, beside a great number of notes,
entirely new;” but notwithstanding this announcement, these annotations
will be found to be but few in number, and, with some exceptions in the
early part of the volume, to throw very little light on the obscurities
of the text. A fifth edition of this translation was published so
recently as 1822, but without any improvement, beyond the furbishing up
of the old-fashioned language of the original preface. A far more
literal translation of the Metamorphoses is that by John Clarke, which
was first published about the year 1735, and had attained to a seventh
edition in 1779. Although this version may be pronounced very nearly to
fulfil the promise set forth in its title page, of being “as literal as
possible,” still, from the singular inelegance of its style, and the
fact of its being couched in the conversational language of the early
part of the last century, and being unaccompanied by any attempt at
explanation, it may safely be pronounced to be ill adapted to the
requirements of the present age. Indeed, it would not, perhaps, be too
much to assert, that, although the translator may, in his own words,
“have done an acceptable service to such gentlemen as are desirous of
regaining or improving the skill they acquired at school,” he has, in
many instances, burlesqued rather than translated his author. Some of
the curiosities of his version will be found set forth in the notes;
but, for the purpose of the more readily justifying this assertion,
a few of them are adduced: the word “nitidus” is always rendered
“neat,” whether applied to a fish, a cow, a chariot,
a laurel, the steps of a temple, or the art of wrestling. He
renders “horridus,” “in a rude pickle;” “virgo” is generally translated
“the young lady;” “vir” is “a gentleman;” “senex” and “senior” are
indifferently “the old blade,” “the old fellow,” v or “the old gentleman;” while “summa arx” is “the very tip-top.”
“Misera” is “poor soul;” “exsilio” means “to bounce forth;” “pellex” is
“a miss;” “lumina” are “the peepers;” “turbatum fugere” is “to
scower off in a mighty bustle;” “confundor” is “to be jumbled;” and
“squalidus” is “in a sorry pickle.” “Importuna” is “a plaguy
baggage;” “adulterium” is rendered “her pranks;” “ambages” becomes
either “a long rabble of words,” “a long-winded detail,” or
“a tale of a tub;” “miserabile carmen” is “a dismal ditty;”
“increpare hos” is “to rattle these blades;” “penetralia” means “the
parlour;” while “accingere,” more literally than elegantly, is
translated “buckle to.” “Situs” is “nasty stuff;” “oscula jungere” is
“to tip him a kiss;” “pingue ingenium” is a circumlocution for
“a blockhead;” “anilia instrumenta” are “his old woman’s
accoutrements;” and “repetito munere Bacchi” is conveyed to the sense of
the reader as, “they return again to their bottle, and take the other
glass.” These are but a specimen of the blemishes which disfigure the
most literal of the English translations of the Metamorphoses. The Clarke “translation” was published as part of a student edition
of Ovid’s Metamorphoses , with the Latin on the top half of the
page, the English below. It was not intended as an independent
text. In the year 1656, a little volume was published, by J[ohn]
B[ulloker,] entitled “Ovid’s Metamorphosis, translated grammatically,
and, according to the propriety of our English tongue, so far as grammar
and the verse will bear, written chiefly for the use of schools, to be
used according to the directions in the preface to the painfull
schoolmaster, and more fully in the book called, ‘Ludus Literarius, or
the Grammar school, chap. 8.’” Notwithstanding a title so pretentious,
it contains a translation of no more than the first 567 lines of the
first Book, executed in a fanciful and pedantic manner; and its rarity
is now the only merit of the volume. A literal interlinear
translation of the first Book “on the plan recommended by Mr. Locke,”
was published in 1839, which had been already preceded by
“a selection from the Metamorphoses of Ovid, adapted to the
Hamiltonian system, by a literal and interlineal translation,” published
by James Hamilton, the author of the Hamiltonian system. This work
contains selections only from the first six books, and consequently
embraces but a very small portion of the entire work. For the better elucidation of the different fabulous narratives and
allusions, explanations have been added, which vi are principally derived from the writings of Herodotus, Apollodorus,
Pausanias, Dio Cassius, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Strabo, Hyginus,
Nonnus, and others of the historians, philosophers, and mythologists of
antiquity. A great number of these illustrations are collected in
the elaborate edition of Ovid, published by the Abbé Banier, one of the
most learned scholars of the last century; who has, therein, and in his
“Explanations of the Fables of Antiquity,” with indefatigable labour and
research, culled from the works of ancient authors, all such information
as he considered likely to throw any light upon the Mythology and
history of Greece and Rome. This course has been adopted, because it was considered that a
statement of the opinions of contemporary authors would be the most
likely to enable the reader to form his own ideas upon the various
subjects presented to his notice. Indeed, except in two or three
instances, space has been found too limited to allow of more than an
occasional reference to the opinions of modern scholars. Such being the
object of the explanations, the reader will not be surprised at the
absence of critical and lengthened discussions on many of those moot
points of Mythology and early history which have occupied, with no very
positive result, the attention of Niebuhr, Lobeck, Müller, Buttmann, and
many other scholars of profound learning. vii A SYNOPTICAL VIEW OF THE PRINCIPAL TRANSFORMATIONS MENTIONED IN THE METAMORPHOSES. BOOK VIII. In the mean time Minos besieges
Megara. Scylla, becoming enamoured of him, betrays her country, the
safety of which depends upon the purple lock of her father Nisu. Being
afterwards rejected by Minos, she clings to his ship, and is changed
into a bird, while her father becomes a sea eagle. Minos returns to
Crete, and having erected the Labyrinth with the assistance of Dædalus,
he there encloses the Minotaur, the disgrace of his family, and feeds it
with his Athenian captives. Theseus being one of these, slays the
monster: and having escaped from the Labyrinth by the aid of Ariadne, he
takes her with him, but deserts her in the isle of Dia, where Bacchus
meets with her, and places her crown among the Constellations. Dædalus
being unable to escape from the island of Crete, invents wings and flies
away; while Icarus, accompanying his father, is drowned. The partridge
beholds the father celebrating his funeral rites, and testifies his joy:
Perdix, or Talus, who had been envied by Minos for his ingenuity, and
had been thrown by him from the temple of Minerva, having been
transformed into that bird. Theseus, having now become celebrated, is
invited to the chase of the Calydonian boar, which Atalanta is the first
to wound. Meleager slays the monster; and his death is accelerated by
his mother Althæa, who places in the fire the fatal billet. Returning
from the expedition, Theseus comes to Acheloüs, and sees the islands
called the Echinades, into which the Naiads have been transformed.
Pirithoüs denies the possibility of this; but Lelex quotes, as an
example, the case of Baucis and Philemon, who were changed into trees,
while their house became a temple, and the neighbouring country a pool
of water. Acheloüs then tells the story of the transformations of
Proteus and of Metra, xii and how Metra supported her father Erisicthon, while afflicted with
violent hunger. BOOK IX. Acheloüs then relates his own
transformations, when he was contending with Hercules for the hand of
Deïanira. Hercules wins her, and Nessus attempts to carry her off: on
which Hercules pierces him with one of his arrows that has been dipped
in the blood of the Hydra. In revenge, Nessus, as he is dying, gives to
Deïanira his garment stained with his blood. She, distrusting her
husband’s affection, sends him the garment; he puts it on, and his
vitals are consumed by the venom. As he is dying, he hurls his attendant
Lychas into the sea, where he becomes a rock. Hercules is conveyed to
heaven, and is enrolled in the number of the Deities. Alcmena, his
mother, goes to her daughter-in-law Iole, and tells her how Galanthis
was changed into a weasel; while she, in her turn, tells the story of
the transformation of her sister Dryope into the lotus. In the meantime
Iolaüs comes, whose youth has been restored by Hebe. Jupiter shows, by
the example of his sons Æacus and Minos, that all are not so blessed.
Miletus, flying from Minos, arrives in Asia, and becomes the father of
Byblis and Caunus. Byblis falls in love with her brother, and is
transformed into a fountain. This would have appeared more surprising to
all, if Iphis had not a short time before, on the day of her nuptials,
been changed into a man. BOOK X. Hymenæus attends these nuptials, and
then goes to those of Orpheus; but with a bad omen, as Eurydice dies
soon after, and cannot be brought to life. In his sorrow, Orpheus
repairs to the solitudes of the mountains, where the trees flock around
him at the sound of his lyre; and, among others, the pine, into which
Atys has been changed; and the cypress, produced from the transformation
of Cyparissus. Orpheus sings of the rape of Ganymede; of the change of
Hyacinthus, who was beloved and slain by Apollo, into a flower; of the
transformation of the Cerastæ into bulls; of the Propœtides, who were
changed into stones; and of the statue of Pygmalion, which was changed
into a living woman, who became the mother of Paphos. He then sings, how
Myrrha, for her incestuous intercourse with her father, was changed into
the myrrh tree; and how Adonis (to whom Venus relates the transformation
of Hippomenes and Atalanta into lions) was transformed into an
anemone. BOOK XI. Orpheus is torn to pieces by the
Thracian women; on which, a serpent, which attacks his face, is
changed into stone. The xiii women are transformed into trees by Bacchus, who deserts Thrace, and
betakes himself to Phrygia; where Midas, for his care of Silenus,
receives the power of making gold. He loathes this gift; and bathing in
the river Pactolus, its sands become golden. For his stupidity, his ears
are changed by Apollo into those of an ass. After this, that God goes to
Troy, and aids Laomedon in building its walls. Hercules rescues his
daughter Hesione, when fastened to a rock, and his companion Telamon
receives her as his wife; while his brother Peleus marries the sea
Goddess, Thetis. Going to visit Ceyx, he learns how Dædalion has been
changed into a hawk, and sees a wolf changed into a rock. Ceyx goes to
consult the oracle of Claros, and perishes by shipwreck. On this,
Morpheus appears to Halcyone, in the form of her husband, and she is
changed into a kingfisher; into which bird Ceyx is also transformed.
Persons who observe them, as they fly, call to mind how Æsacus, the son
of Priam, was changed into a sea bird, called the didapper. BOOK XII. Priam performs the obsequies for
Æsacus, believing him to be dead. The children of Priam attend, with the
exception of Paris, who, having gone to Greece, carries off Helen, the
wife of Menelaüs. The Greeks pursue Paris, but are detained at Aulis,
where they see a serpent changed into stone, and prepare to sacrifice
Iphigenia to Diana; but a hind is substituted for her. The Trojans
hearing of the approach of the Greeks, in arms await their arrival. At
the first onset, Cygnus, dashed by Achilles against a stone, is changed
by Neptune into the swan, a bird of the same name, he having been
vulnerable by no weapon. At the banquet of the chiefs, Nestor calls to
mind Cæneus, who was also invulnerable; and who having been changed from
a woman into a man, on being buried under a heap of trees, was
transformed into a bird. This Cæneus was one of the Lapithæ, at the
battle of whom with the Centaurs, Nestor was present. Nestor also tells
how his brother, Periclymenus, was changed into an eagle. Meanwhile,
Neptune laments the death of Cygnus, and entreats Apollo to direct the
arrow of Paris against the heel of Achilles, which is done, and that
hero is slain. BOOK XIII. Ajax Telamon and Ulysses contend for
the arms of Achilles. Ihe former slays himself, on which a hyacinth
springs up from his blood. Troy being taken, Hecuba is carried to
Thrace, where she tears out the eyes of Polymnestor, and is afterwards
changed into a bitch. While the Gods deplore her misfortunes, Aurora is
occupied with grief for the death of her xiv son Memnon, from whose ashes the birds called Memnonides arise. Æneas
flying from Troy, visits Anius, whose daughters have been changed into
doves; and after touching at other places, remarkable for various
transformations, he arrives in Sicily, where is the maiden Scylla, to
whom Galatea relates how Polyphemus courted her, and how he slew Acis.
On this, Glaucus, who has been changed into a sea Deity, makes his
appearance. BOOK XIV. Circe changes Scylla into a monster.
Æneas arrives in Africa, and is entertained by Dido. Passing by the
islands called Pithecusæ, where the Cecropes have been transformed from
men into apes, he comes to Italy; and landing near the spot which he
calls Caicta, he learns from Macareus many particulars respecting
Ulysses and the incantations of Circe, and how king Picus was changed
into a woodpecker. He afterwards wages war with Turnus. Through Venulus,
Turnus asks assistance of Diomedes, whose companions have been
transformed into birds, and he is refused. Venulus, as he returns, sees
the spot where an Apulian shepherd had been changed into an olive tree.
The ships of Æneas, when on fire, become sea Nymphs, just as a heron
formerly arose from the flames of the city of Ardea. Æneas is now made a
Deity. Other kings succeed him, and in the time of Procas Pomona lives.
She is beloved by Vertumnus, who first assumes the form of an old woman;
and having told the story of Anaxarete, who was changed into a stone for
her cruelty, he reassumes the shape of a youth, and prevails upon the
Goddess. Cold waters, by the aid of the Naiads become warm. Romulus
having succeeded Numitor, he is made a Deity under the name of Quirinus,
while his wife Hersilia becomes the Goddess Hora. BOOK XV. Numa succeeds; who, on making
inquiry respecting the origin of the city of Crotona, learns how black
pebbles were changed into white; he also attends the lectures of
Pythagoras, on the changes which all matter is eternally undergoing.
Egeria laments the death of Numa, and will not listen to the
consolations of Hippolytus, who tells her of his own transformation, and
she pines away into a fountain. This is not less wonderful, than how
Tages sprang from a clod of earth; or how the lance of Romulus became a
tree; or how Cippus became decked with horns. The Poet concludes by
passing to recent events; and after shewing how Æsculapius was first
worshipped by the Romans, in the sacred isle of the Tiber, he relates
the Deification of Julius Cæsar and his change into a Star; and
foretells imperishable fame for himself. 263 BOOK THE EIGHTH. FABLE I. Minos commences the war with the siege
of Megara. The preservation of the city depends on a lock of the hair of
its king, Nisus. His daughter, Scylla, falling in love with Minos, cuts
off the fatal lock, and gives it to him. Minos makes himself master of
the place; and, abhorring Scylla and the crime she has been guilty of,
he takes his departure. In despair, she throws herself into the sea, and
follows his fleet. Nisus, being transformed into a sea eagle, attacks
her in revenge, and she is changed into a bird called Ciris. Now, Lucifer unveiling the day and dispelling the season of night,
the East wind 1 fell, and the moist vapours arose. The favourable South
winds gave a passage to the sons of Æacus, 2 and Cephalus returning;
with which, being prosperously impelled, they made the port they were
bound for, before it was expected. In the meantime Minos is laying waste the Lelegeian coasts, 3 and
previously tries the strength of his arms against the city Alcathoë,
which Nisus had; among whose honoured hoary hairs a lock, distinguished
by its purple colour, descended from the middle of his crown, the
safeguard of his powerful kingdom. The sixth horns of the rising Phœbe
were now growing again, and the fortune of the war was still in
suspense, and for a long time did victory hover between them both with
uncertain 264 viii. 13-47. wings. There was a regal tower built with vocal walls, on which the son
of Latona 4 is reported to have laid his golden harp; and its sound adhered to the stone. The daughter of Nisus was wont often to
go up thither, and to strike the resounding stones with a little pebble,
when it was a time of peace. She used, likewise, often to view the
fight, and the contests of the hardy warfare, from that tower. And now,
by the continuance of the hostilities, she had become acquainted with
both the names of the chiefs, their arms, their horses, their dresses,
and the Cydonean 5 quivers. Before the rest, she had observed the face of the chieftain, the son
of Europa; even better than was enough for merely knowing him. In her
opinion, Minos, whether it was that he had enclosed his head in a helm
crested with feathers, was beauteous in a helmet; or whether he had
taken up a shield shining with gold, it became him to assume that
shield. Drawing his arm back, did he hurl the slender javelin; the
maiden commended his skill, joined with strength. Did he bend the wide
bow with the arrow laid upon it; she used to swear that thus Phœbus
stood, when assuming his arrows. But when he exposed his face, by taking
off the brazen helmet , and, arrayed in purple, pressed the back
of a white horse, beauteous with embroidered housings, and guided his
foaming mouth; the virgin daughter of Nisus was hardly mistress of
herself, hardly able to control a sound mind. She used to call the
javelin happy which he touched, and the reins happy which he was
pressing with his hand. She had an impulse (were it only possible) to
direct her virgin footsteps through the hostile ranks; she had an
impulse to cast her body from the top of the towers into the Gnossian
camp, or to open the gates, strengthened with brass, to the enemy; or, indeed , anything else, if Minos should wish it. And as she was
sitting, looking at the white tents of the Dictæan king, she said,
“I am in doubt whether I should rejoice, or whether I should
grieve, that this mournful war is carried on. I grieve that Minos
is the enemy of the person who loves him; but unless there had been a
war, would he have been known to me? yet, taking me for a 265 viii. 47-82. hostage, he might cease the war, and have me for his companion, me as a
pledge of peace. If, most beauteous of beings, she who bore thee, was
such as thou art thyself, with reason was the God Jupiter inflamed with love for her. Oh! thrice happy were I, if, moving
upon wings through the air, I could light upon the camp of the
Gnossian king, and, owning myself and my flame, could ask him with what
dowry he could wish to be purchased; provided only, that he did not ask
the city of my father. For, perish rather the desired alliance, than
that I should prevail by treason; although the clemency of a merciful
conqueror has often made it of advantage to many, to be conquered. He
certainly carries on a just war for his slain son, 6 and is strong both
in his cause, and in the arms that defend his cause. “We shall be conquered, as I suppose. If this fate awaits this city,
why should his own arms, and not my love, open the walls to him? It will
be better for him to conquer without slaughter and delay, and the
expense of his own blood. How much, indeed, do I dread, Minos, lest any
one should unknowingly wound thy breast! for who is so hardened as to
dare, unless unknowingly, to direct his cruel lance against thee? The
design pleases me; and my determination is to deliver up my country as a
dowry, together with myself, and so to put an end to the war. But
to be willing, is too little; a guard watches the approaches, and
my father keeps the keys of the gates. Him alone, in my wretchedness, do
I dread; he alone obstructs my desires. Would that the Gods would grant
I might be without a father! Every one, indeed, is a God to himself.
Fortune is an enemy to idle prayers. Another woman, inflamed with a
passion so great, would long since have taken a pleasure in destroying
whatever stood in the way of her love. And why should any one be bolder
than myself? I could dare to go through flames, and amid
swords. But in this case there is no occasion for any flames or any swords; I only want the lock of my father. That
purple lock is more precious to me than gold; it will make me happy, and
mistress of my own wish.” As she is saying such things, the night draws on, the greatest nurse
of cares, and with the darkness her boldness 266 viii. 82-116. increases. The first slumbers are now come, in which sleep takes
possession of the breast wearied with the cares of the day. She silently
enters the chamber of her father, and ( O abominable crime!)
the daughter despoils the father of his fatal lock, and having got the
prize of crime, carries with her the spoil of her impiety; and issuing
forth by the gate, she goes through the midst of the enemy, (so great is
her confidence in her deserts) to the king, whom, in astonishment, she
thus addresses: “’Twas love that urged the deed. I am Scylla, the royal issue of Nisus; to thee do I deliver the fortunes of
my country and my own, as well ; I ask for no reward, but
thyself. Take this purple lock, as a pledge of my love; and do not
consider that I am delivering to thee a lock of hair, but the life of my
father.” And then , in her right hand, she holds forth the
infamous present. Minos refuses it, thus held out; and shocked at
the thought of so unheard of a crime, he says, “May the Gods,
O thou reproach of our age, banish thee from their universe; and
may both earth and sea be denied to thee. At least, I will not
allow so great a monster to come into Crete, the birth-place of Jupiter,
which is my realm.” He thus spoke; 7 and when, like a
most just lawgiver, he had imposed conditions on the vanquished, he
ordered the halsers of the fleet to be loosened, and the brazen beaked ships to be impelled with the oars. Scylla, when she
beheld the launched ships sailing on the main, and saw that the
prince did not give her the expected reward of her wickedness,
having spent all her entreaties, fell into a violent rage, and
holding up her hands, with her hair dishevelled, in her frenzy she
exclaimed, “Whither dost thou fly, the origin of thy achievements thus left behind, O thou preferred before my country, preferred before
my father? Whither dost thou fly, barbarous man ? whose victory is
both my crime and my merit. Has neither the gift presented to thee, nor
yet my passion, moved thee? nor yet the fact that all my hopes
were centred in thee alone? For whither shall I return, forsaken by
thee ? To my country? Subdued, it is ruined. But suppose it were still safe; by my treachery, it is shut against me. To the face
of my father, that I have placed in thy power. My fellow-citizens 267 viii. 116-142. hate me deservedly; the neighbours dread my example. I have closed
the whole world against me, that Crete alone might be open to me .
And dost thou thus forbid me that as well? Is it thus, ungrateful one,
that thou dost desert me? Europa was not thy mother, but the
inhospitable Syrtis, 8 or Armenian 9 tigresses, or Charybdis disturbed by
the South wind. Nor wast thou the son of Jupiter; nor was thy mother
beguiled by the assumed form of a bull. That story of thy birth
is false. He was both a fierce bull, and one charmed with the love of no
heifer, that begot thee. Nisus, my father, take vengeance upon me. Thou
city so lately betrayed, rejoice at my misfortunes; for I have deserved
them, I confess, and I am worthy to perish. Yet let some one of
those, whom I have impiously ruined, destroy me. Why dost thou, who hast
conquered by means of my crime, chastise that crime? This, which was
treason to my country and to my father, was an act of kindness to thee.
She is truly worthy 10 of thee for a husband, who, adulterously enclosed in wood, deceived the fierce-looking bull, and bore in
her womb an offspring of shape dissimilar to herself . And do my
complaints reach thy ears? Or do the same winds bear away my fruitless
words, and thy ships, ungrateful man? Now, ah! now, it is not to
be wondered at that Pasiphaë preferred the bull to thee; thou didst have
the more savage nature of the two . Wretch that I am! He joys in
speeding onward, and the waves resound, cleaved by his oars. Together
with myself, alas! my native land recedes from him. Nothing dost
thou avail; oh thou! forgetful to no purpose of my deserts. In spite of
thee, will I follow thee, and grasping thy crooked stern, I will be
dragged through the long seas.” 268 viii. 143-151. Scarce has she said this, when she leaps into the waves, and
follows the ships, Cupid giving her strength, and she hangs, an
unwelcome companion, to the Gnossian ship. When her father beholds her,
(for now he is hovering in the air, and he has lately been made a sea
eagle, with tawny wings), he is going to tear her in pieces with his
crooked beak. Through fear she quits the stern; but the light air seems
to support her as she is falling, that she may not touch the sea. It is
feathers that support her . With feathers, being changed into a
bird, she is called Ciris; 11 and this name does she obtain from
cutting off the lock. EXPLANATION. Minos, having raised an army and received auxiliary troops from his
allies, made war upon the Athenians, to revenge the death of his son,
Androgeus. Having conquered Nisea, he laid siege to Megara, which was
betrayed by the perfidy of Scylla, the daughter of its king, Nisus.
Pausanias and other historians say that the story here related by the
Poet is based on fact; and that Scylla held a secret correspondence with
Minos during the siege of Megara, and, at length, introduced him into
the town, by opening the gates to him with the keys which she had stolen
from her father, while he was asleep. This is probably alluded to under
the allegorical description of the fatal lock of hair, though why it
should be depicted in that form especially, it is difficult to guess.
The change of Scylla into a lark, or partridge, and of her father into a
sea eagle, are poetical fictions based on the equivocal meanings of
their names, the one Greek and the other Hebrew; for the name ‘Ciris’
resembles the Greek verb κείρω , which signifies ‘to clip,’ or ‘cut short.’
‘Nisus,’ too, resembles the Hebrew word ‘Netz,’ which means a bird
resembling the osprey, or sea eagle. Apollodorus says, that Minos
ordered Scylla to be thrown into the sea; and Zenodotus, that he caused
her to be hanged at the mainmast of his ship. 269 viii. 152-176. FABLE II . Minos , having overcome the Athenians,
obliges them to pay a tribute of youths and virgins of the best
families, to be exposed to the Minotaur. The lot falls on Theseus, who,
by the assistance of Ariadne, kills the monster, escapes from the
labyrinth, which Dædalus made, and carries Ariadne to the island of
Naxos, where he abandons her. Bacchus wooes her, and, to immortalize her
name, he transforms the crown which he has given her into a
Constellation. Minos paid, as a vow to Jupiter, the bodies of a hundred bulls, as
soon as, disembarking from his ships, he reached the land of the
Curetes; and his palace was decorated with the spoils there hung up. The
reproach of his family had now grown up, and the shameful
adultery of his mother was notorious, from the unnatural shape of the
two-formed monster. Minos resolves to remove the disgrace from his
abode, and to enclose it in a habitation of many divisions, and an abode
full of mazes. Dædalus, a man very famed for his skill in
architecture, plans the work, and confounds the marks of
distinction , and leads the eyes into mazy wanderings, by the
intricacy of its various passages. No otherwise than as the limpid
Mæander sports in the Phrygian fields, and flows backwards and forwards
with its varying course, and, meeting itself, beholds its waters that
are to follow, and fatigues its wandering current, now pointing to its source, and now to the open sea. Just so, Dædalus fills
innumerable paths with windings; and scarcely can he himself return to
the entrance, so great are the intricacies of the place. After he has
shut up here the double figure of a bull and of a youth; 12 and the third
supply, chosen by lot each nine years, has subdued the monster twice before gorged with Athenian blood; and when the difficult
entrance, retraced by none of those who have entered it before,
has been found by the aid of the maiden, by means of the thread gathered
up again; immediately, the son of Ægeus, carrying away the daughter of
Minos, sets sail for Dia, 13 and barbarously deserts his
companion on those shores. 270 viii. 176-182. Her, thus deserted and greatly lamenting, Liber embraces and
aids; and, that she may be famed by a lasting Constellation, he places
in the heavens the crown taken from off her head. It flies through the
yielding air, and, as it flies, its jewels are suddenly changed into
fires, and they settle in their places, the shape of the crown still remaining; which is in the middle, 14 between the
Constellation resting on his knee, 15 and that which holds the
serpents. EXPLANATION. Oppressed with famine, and seeing the enemy at their gates, the
Athenians went to consult the oracle at Delphi; and were answered, that
to be delivered from their calamities, they must give satisfaction to
Minos. They immediately sent ambassadors to him, humbly suing for peace,
which he granted them, on condition that each year, according to
Apollodorus and Diodorus Siculus, or every nine years, according to
Plutarch and Ovid, they should send him seven young men and as many
virgins. The severity of these conditions provoked the Athenians to
render Minos as odious as possible; whereupon, they promulgated the
story, that he destined the youths that were sent to him, to fight in
the Labyrinth against the Minotaur, which was the fruit of an intrigue
of his wife Pasiphaë with a white bull which Neptune had sent out of the
sea. They added, that Dædalus favoured this extraordinary passion of the
queen; and that Venus inspired Pasiphaë with it, to be revenged for
having been surprised with Mars by Apollo, her father. Plato, Plutarch,
and other writers acknowledge that these stories were invented from the
hatred which the Greeks bore to the king of Crete. As, however, these extravagant fables have generally some foundation in
fact, we are informed by Servius, Tzetzes, and Zenobius, that, in the
absence of Minos, Pasiphaë fell in love with a young noble of the Cretan
court, named Taurus, who, according to Plutarch, was the commander of
the fleet of Minos; that Dædalus, their confidant, allowed their
assignations to take place in his house, and that the queen was
afterwards 271 viii. 183-189. delivered of twins, of which the one resembled Minos, and the other
Taurus . This,
according to those authors, was the foundation of the story as to the
fate for which the young Athenians were said to be destined.
Philochorus, quoted by Plutarch, says that Minos instituted funeral
games in honour of his son Androgeus, and that those who were vanquished
became the slaves of the conquerors. That author adds, that Taurus was
the first who won all the prizes in these games, and that he used the
unfortunate Athenians, who became his slaves, with great barbarity.
Aristotle tells us that the tribute was paid three times by the
Athenians, and that the lives of the captives were spent in the most
dreadful servitude. Dædalus, on returning into Crete, built a labyrinth there, in which,
very probably, these games were celebrated. Palæphatus, however, says
that Theseus fought in a cavern, where the son of Taurus had been
confined. Plutarch and Catullus say, that Theseus voluntarily offered to
go to Crete with the other Athenians, while Diodorus Siculus says that
the lot fell on him to be of the number. His delivery by Ariadne,
through her giving him the thread, is probably a poetical method of
informing us that she gave her lover the plan of the labyrinth where he
was confined, that he might know its windings and the passage out.
Eustathius, indeed, says, that Ariadne received a thread from Dædalus;
but he must mean a plan of the labyrinth, which he himself had designed.
The story of Ariadne’s intercourse with Bacchus is most probably founded
on the fact, that on arriving at the Isle of Naxos, when she was
deserted by Theseus, she became the wife of a priest of Bacchus. FABLE III. Dædalus , weary of his exile, finds
means, by making himself wings, to escape out of Crete. His son Icarus,
forgetting the advice of his father, and flying too high, the Sun melts
his wings, and he perishes in the sea, which afterwards bore his name.
The sister of Dædalus commits her son Perdix to his care, for the
purpose of being educated. Dædalus, being jealous of the talent of his
nephew, throws him from a tower, with the intention of killing him; but
Minerva supports him in his fall, and transforms him into a
partridge. In the meantime, Dædalus, abhorring Crete and his prolonged exile, 16 and inflamed by the love of his native soil, was enclosed there by the sea. “Although Minos,” said he, “may beset the land and the sea,
still the skies, at least, are open. By that way will we go: let Minos
possess everything besides : he does not sway the air.” Thus he spoke; and he turned his thoughts to arts unknown till
then ; and varied the course 272 viii. 189-221. of nature. For he arranges feathers in order, beginning from the
least, the shorter one succeeding the longer; so that you might suppose
they grew on an incline. Thus does the rustic pipe sometimes rise by
degrees, with unequal straws. Then he binds those in the middle with
thread, and the lowermost ones with wax; and, thus ranged, with a gentle
curvature, he bends them, so as to imitate real wings of birds.
His son Icarus stands together with him; and, ignorant that he is
handling the source of danger to himself, with a smiling
countenance, he sometimes catches at the feathers which the shifting
breeze is ruffling; and, at other times, he softens the yellow wax with
his thumb; and, by his playfulness, he retards the wondrous work of his
father. After the finishing hand was put to the work, the workman himself
poised his own body upon the two wings, and hung suspended in the beaten
air. He provided his son with them as well; and said to him,
“Icarus, I recommend thee to keep the middle tract; lest, if thou
shouldst go too low, the water should clog thy wings; if too high, the
fire of the sun should scorch them. Fly between both; and I bid
thee neither to look at Boötes, nor Helice, 17 nor the drawn sword
of Orion. Under my guidance, take thy way.” At the same time, he
delivered him rules for flying, and fitted the untried wings to his
shoulders. Amid his work and his admonitions, the cheeks of the old man
were wet, and the hands of the father trembled. He gives kisses to his
son, never again to be repeated; and, raised upon his wings, he flies
before, and is concerned for his companion, just as the bird which has
led forth her tender young from the lofty nest into the air. And he
encourages him to follow, and instructs him in the fatal art, and both
moves his own wings himself, and looks back on those of his son.
A person while he is angling for fish with his quivering rod, or
the shepherd leaning on his crook, or the ploughman on the plough tail,
when he beholds them, is astonished, and believes them to be Divinities,
who thus can cleave the air. And now Samos, 18 sacred to Juno, and
Delos, 273 viii. 221-253. and Paros, were left behind to the left hand. On the right were
Lebynthus, 19 and Calymne, 20 fruitful in honey; when the boy
began to be pleased with a bolder flight, and forsook his guide; and,
touched with a desire of reaching heaven, pursued his course still
higher. The vicinity of the scorching Sun softened the fragrant wax that
fastened his wings. The wax was melted; he shook his naked arms, and,
wanting his oar-like wings, he caught no more air. His face, too,
as he called on the name of his father, was received in the azure water,
which received its name 21 from him. But the unhappy father, now no more a father, said, “Icarus, where
art thou? In what spot shall I seek thee, Icarus?” did he say; when he beheld his wings in the waters, and then he cursed
his own arts; and he buried his body in a tomb, and the land was called
from the name of him buried there. As he was laying the body of his
unfortunate son in the tomb, a prattling partridge beheld him from
a branching holm-oak, 22 and, by its notes, testified its delight.
’Twas then but a single bird of its kind , and never seen in
former years, and, lately made a bird, was a grievous reproof, Dædalus,
to thee. For, ignorant of the decrees of fate, his sister had
entrusted her son to be instructed by him, a boy who had passed
twice six birthdays, with a mind eager for instruction. ’Twas he, too,
who took the backbones observed in the middle of the fish, for an
example, and cut a continued row of teeth in iron, with a
sharp edge, and thus discovered the use of the saw. He was the first, too, that bound two arms of iron to one centre,
that, being divided and of equal length, the one part might stand
fixed, and the other might describe a circle. Dædalus was
envious, and threw him headlong from the sacred citadel of Minerva,
falsely pretending that he had fallen by accident . But Pallas,
who favours ingenuity, received him, and made him a bird; and, in the
middle of the air, he flew upon 274 viii. 254-261. wings. Yet the vigour of his genius, once so active, passed into his
wings and into his feet; his name, too, remained the same as before. Yet
this bird does not raise its body aloft, nor make its nest in the
branches and the lofty tops of trees, but flies near the ground,
and lays its eggs in hedges: and, mindful of its former fall, it dreads
the higher regions. EXPLANATION. Dædalus was a talented Athenian, of the family of Erechtheus; and he was
particularly famed for his skill in statuary and architecture. He became
jealous of the talents of his nephew, Talos, whom Ovid here calls
Perdix; and, envying his inventions of the saw, the compasses, and the
art of turning, he killed him privately. Flying to Crete, he was
favourably received by Minos, who was then at war with the Athenians. He
there built the Labyrinth, as Pliny the Elder asserts, after the plan of
that in Egypt, which is described by Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and
Strabo. Philochorus, however, as quoted by Plutarch, says that it did
not resemble the Labyrinth of Egypt, and that it was only a prison in
which criminals were confined. Minos, being informed that Dædalus had assisted Pasiphaë in carrying out
her criminal designs, kept him in prison; but escaping thence, by the
aid of Pasiphaë, he embarked in a ship which she had prepared for him.
Using sails, which till then, according to Pausanias and Palæphatus,
were unknown, he escaped from the galleys of Minos, which were provided
with oars only. Icarus, either fell into the sea, or, overpowered with
the fatigues of the voyage, died near an island in the Archipelago,
which afterwards received his name. These facts have been disguised by
the poets under the ingenious fiction of the wings, and the neglect of
Icarus to follow his father’s advice, as here related. FABLE IV. Diana , offended at the neglect of
Œneus, king of Calydon, when performing his vows to the Gods, sends a
wild boar to ravage his dominions; on which Œneus assembled the princes
of the country for its pursuit. His son Meleager leads the chase, and,
having killed the monster, presents its head to his mistress, Atalanta,
the daughter of the king of Arcadia. He afterwards kills his two uncles,
Plexippus and Toxeus, who would deprive her of this badge of his
victory. Their sister Althæa, the mother of Meleager, filled with grief
at their death, loads her son with execrations; and, remembering the
torch which she received from the Fates at his birth, and on which the
preservation of his life depends, she throws it into the fire. As soon
as it is consumed, Meleager expires in the greatest torments. His
sisters mourn over his body, until Diana changes them into birds. And now the Ætnæan land received Dædalus in his fatigue; and 275 viii. 261-285. Cocalus, 23 taking up arms for him as he entreated, was commended
for his kindness. And now Athens has ceased to pay her mournful
tribute, through the exploits of Theseus. The temples are decked with
garlands, and they invoke warlike Minerva, with Jupiter and the other
Gods, whom they adore with the blood of victims vowed, and with
presents offered, and censers 24 of frankincense. Wandering Fame had
spread the renown of Theseus throughout the Argive cities, and the
nations which rich Achaia contained, implored his aid amid great
dangers. Calydon, too , although it had Meleager, 25 suppliantly
addressed him with anxious entreaties. The occasion of asking aid was a boar, the servant and the avenger of Diana in her wrath. For they say that Œneus, for the blessings of a plenteous year, had
offered the first fruits of the corn to Ceres, to Bacchus his wine, and
the Palladian juice 26 of olives to the yellow-haired Minerva.
These invidious honours commencing with the rural Deities , were
continued to all the Gods above; they say that the altars of the
daughter of Latona, who was omitted, were alone left without
frankincense. Wrath affects even the Deities. “But this ,” says
she, “I will not tamely put up with; and I, who am thus
dishonoured, will not be said to be unrevenged as well :” and she
sends a boar as an avenger throughout the lands of Œneus, than which not
even does verdant Epirus 27 possess bulls of greater size; even the fields
of Sicily have them of less magnitude. His eyes shine with blood and 276 viii. 285-304. flames, his rough neck is stiff; bristles, too, 28 stand up, like
spikes, thickly set; like palisades 29 do those bristles project, just
like high spikes. Boiling foam, with a harsh noise, flows down his broad
shoulders; his tusks rival the tusks of India. Thunders issue from his
mouth; the foliage is burnt up with the blast. One while he tramples
down the corn in the growing blade, and crops the expectations of the
husbandman, doomed to lament, as yet unripe, and he intercepts the corn
in the ear. In vain does the threshing floor, and in vain do the barns
await the promised harvest. The heavy grapes, with the long branches of
the vine, are scattered about, and the berries with the boughs of the
ever-green olive. He vents his fury, too, upon the flocks. These,
neither dogs nor shepherds can protect ; not even the
fierce bulls are able to defend the herds. The people fly in all
directions, and do not consider themselves safe, but in the walls of a
city, until Meleager, and, together with him , a choice body
of youths, unite from a desire for fame. The two sons of Tyndarus, 30 the one famous for boxing, the other
for his skill in horsemanship; Jason, too, the builder of the first
ship, and Theseus, with Pirithoüs, 31 happy unison, and the two sons of
Thestius, 32 and Lynceus, 33 the son of 277 viii. 304-312. Aphareus, and the swift Idas, and Cæneus, 34 now no longer a
woman; and the valiant Leucippus, 35 and Acastus, 36 famous for the dart,
and Hippothoüs, 37 and Dryas, 38 and Phœnix, 39 the son of Amyntor,
and the two sons of Actor, 40 and Phyleus, 41 sent from Elis, are there . Nor is Telamon 42 absent; the father, too, of the
great Achilles; 43 and with the son of Pheres, 44 and the Hyantian
Iolaüs, 45 the active Eurytion, 46 and Echion, 47 invincible in
the race, and the Narycian Lelex, 48 and Panopeus, 49 and 278 viii. 312-328. Hyleus, 50 and bold Hippasus, 51 and Nestor, 52 now but in his
early years. Those, too, whom Hippocoön 53 sent from ancient Amyclæ, 54 and the father-in-law of Penelope, 55 with the Parrhasian Ancæus, 56 and
the sage son of Ampycus, 57 and the descendant of Œclus, 58 as yet safe
from his wife, and Tegeæan 59 Atalanta , the glory of the
Lycæan groves. A polished buckle fastened the top of her robe; her
plain hair was gathered into a single knot. The ivory keeper of her
weapons rattled, hanging from her left shoulder; her left hand, too,
held a bow. Such was her dress, and her face such as you might say, with
reason, was that of a maid in a boy, that of a boy in a maid. Her the
Calydonian hero both beheld, and at the same moment sighed for her,
against the will of the God; and he caught the latent flame, and said,
“Oh, happy will he be , if she shall vouchsafe to make any
one her husband.” The occasion and propriety allow him to say no more;
the greater deeds of the mighty contest now engage him. 279 viii. 329-361. A wood, thick with trees, which no age has cut down, rises from a
plain, and looks down upon the fields below. After the heroes are come
there, some extend the nets; some take the couples off the dogs, some
follow close the traces of his feet, and are anxious to discover their
own danger. There is a hollow channel, along which rivulets of rain
water are wont to discharge themselves. The bending willows cover the
lower parts of the cavity, and smooth sedges, and marshy rushes, and
oziers, and thin reeds with their long stalks. Aroused from this spot,
the boar rushes violently into the midst of the enemy, like lightning
darted from the bursting clouds. In his onset the grove is laid level,
and the wood, borne down, makes a crashing noise. The young men raise a
shout, and with strong right hands hold their weapons extended before
them, brandished with their broad points . Onward he rushes, and disperses the dogs, as any one of them opposes his career; and scatters them, as they bark at
him , with sidelong wounds. The spear that was first hurled by the
arm of Echion, was unavailing, and made a slight incision in the trunk
of a maple tree. The next, if it had not employed too much of the
strength of him who threw it, seemed as if it would stick in the back it
was aimed at: it went beyond. The owner of the weapon was the Pagasæan
Jason. “Phœbus,” said the son of Ampycus, 60 “if I have worshipped
thee, and if I do worship thee, grant me the favour to reach what
is now aimed at, with unerring weapon.” The God consented to his
prayer, so far as he could. The boar was struck by him, but without a
wound; Diana took the steel head from off the flying weapon; the shaft
reached him without the point. The rage of the monster was aroused, and
not less violently was he inflamed than the lightnings; light darted
from his eyes, and flame was breathed from his breast. As the stone
flies, launched by the tightened rope, when it is aimed 61 at either
walls, or towers filled with soldiers, with the like unerring onset is
the destroying boar borne on among the youths, and lays upon the ground
Eupalamus and Pelagon, 62 who guard the right wing. Thus 280 viii. 361-391. prostrate, their companions bear them off. But Enæsimus, the son of
Hippocoön, does not escape a deadly wound. The sinews of his knee, cut by the boar , fail him as he trembles, and prepares to turn his
back. Perhaps, too, the Pylian Nestor would have perished 63 before
the times of the Trojan war : but taking a spring, by means of his
lance, planted in the ground , he leaped into the branches of a
tree that was standing close by, and, safe in his position, looked down
upon the enemy which he had escaped. He, having whetted his tusk on the
trunk of an oak, fiercely stood, ready for their destruction; and,
trusting to his weapons newly pointed, gored the thigh of the great
Othriades 64 with his crooked tusks. But the two brothers, not yet
made Constellations of the heavens, distinguished from the rest, were
borne upon horses whiter than the bleached snow; and both were
brandishing the points of their lances, poised in the air, with a
tremulous motion. They would have inflicted wounds, had not the bristly monster entered the shady wood, a place penetrable by
neither weapons nor horses. Telamon pursues him; and, heedless in the
heat of pursuit, falls headlong, tripped up by the root of a tree. While
Peleus 65 is lifting him up, the Tegeæan damsel fits a swift
arrow to the string, and, bending the bow, lets it fly. Fixed under the
ear of the beast, the arrow razes the surface of the skin, and dyes the
bristles red with a little blood. And not more joyful is she at the
success of her aim than Meleager is. He is supposed to have observed it first, and first to have pointed
out the blood to his companions, and to have said, “Thou shalt receive
due honour for thy bravery.” The heroes blush in emulation ; and
they encourage one another, and raise their spirits with shouts, and
discharge their weapons without any order. Their very multitude
is a hindrance to those that are thrown, and it baffles the blow for
which it is designed. Behold! the Arcadian, 66 wielding his
battle-axe, rushing madly 281 viii. 391-430. on to his fate, said, “Learn, O youths, how much the weapons of men
excel those of women, and give way for my achievement. Though the
daughter of Latona herself should protect him by her own arms, still, in
spite of Diana, shall my right hand destroy him.” Such words did he
boastingly utter with self-confident lips; and lifting his double-edged
axe with both hands, he stood erect upon tiptoe. The beast seized him thus bold, and, where there is the nearest way to death, directed
his two tusks to the upper part of his groin. Ancæus fell; and his
bowels, twisted, rush forth, falling with plenteous blood, and the earth
was soaked with gore. Pirithoüs, the son of Ixion, was advancing
straight against the enemy, shaking his spear in his powerful right
hand. To him the son of Ægeus, at a distance, said, “O thou, dearer
to me than myself; stop, thou better part of my soul; we may be valiant
at a distance: his rash courage was the destruction of Ancæus.” Thus he spoke, and he hurled his lance of cornel wood, heavy with
its brazen point; which, well poised, and likely to fulfil his desires,
a leafy branch of a beech-tree opposed. The son of Æson, too, hurled his javelin, which unlucky chance
turned away from the beast , to the destruction of an unoffending
dog, and running through his entrails, it was pinned through those entrails into the earth. But the hand of the son of Œneus
has different success; and of two discharged by him, the first spear is
fastened in the earth, the second in the middle of his back. There is no
delay; while he rages, while he is wheeling his body round, and pouring
forth foam, hissing with the fresh blood, the giver of the wound comes
up, and provokes his adversary to fury, and buries his shining hunting
spear in his opposite shoulder. His companions attest their delight in
an encouraging shout, and in their right hands endeavour to grasp the
conquering right hand; and with wonder they behold the huge beast as he
lies upon a large space of ground, and they do not deem it safe as yet
to touch him; but yet they, each of them, stain their weapons with his
blood. Jason himself, placing his foot upon it, presses his
frightful head, and thus he says: “Receive, Nonacrian Nymph, the spoil
that is my right; and let my glory be shared by thee.” Immediately he
gives her the skin as the spoil, thick with the stiffening bristles, and
the head remarkable for the huge tusks. The giver of the present, as
well as the present, is a source of pleasure to 282 viii. 430-463. her. The others envy her, and there is a murmuring throughout the whole
company. Of these, stretching out their arms, with a loud voice, the
sons of Thestius cry out, “Come, lay them down, and do not thou,
a woman, interfere with our honours; let not thy confidence in thy
beauty deceive thee, and let the donor, seized with this passion for
thee, keep at a distance.” And then from her they take the
present, and from him the right of disposing of the
present. The warlike 67 prince did not brook it, and, indignant with
swelling rage, he said, “Learn, ye spoilers of the honour that belongs
to another, how much deeds differ from threats;” and, with his cruel
sword, he pierced the breast of Plexippus, dreading no such thing. Nor
suffered he Toxeus, who was doubtful what to do, and both wishful to
avenge his brother, and fearing his brother’s fate, long to be in doubt;
but a second time warmed his weapon, reeking with the former slaughter,
in the blood of the brother. Althæa was carrying gifts to the temples of the Gods, her son being
victorious, when she beheld her slain brothers carried off from the
field : uttering a shriek, she filled the city with her sad
lamentations, and assumed black garments in exchange for her golden
ones. But soon as the author of their death was made known, all grief
vanished; and from tears it was turned to a thirst for vengeance. There
was a billet, which, when the daughter of Thestius was lying in labour with her son , the three Sisters, the Fates , placed in the
flames, and spinning the fatal threads, with their thumbs pressed upon
them, they said, “We give to thee, O new-born babe , and to
this wood, the same period of existence .” Having uttered this
charm, the Goddesses departed; and the mother snatched the
flaming brand from the fire, and sprinkled it with flowing water. Long
had it been concealed in her most retired apartment; and being thus preserved, had preserved, O youth, thy life. This billet the mother now brings forth, and orders torches to
be heaped on broken pieces of wood ; and when heaped, applies to
them the hostile flames. Then four times essaying to lay the branch upon
the flames, four times does she pause in the attempt. Both the mother 283 viii. 463-492. and the sister struggle hard, and the two different titles influence her
breast in different ways. Often is her countenance pale with
apprehension of the impending crime; often does rage, glowing in her
eyes, produce its red colour. And one while is her countenance like that
of one making some cruel threat or other; at another moment, such as you
could suppose to be full of compassion. And when the fierce heat of her
feelings has dried up her tears, still are tears found to flow .
Just as the ship, which the wind and a tide running contrary to the
wind, seize, is sensible of the double assault, and unsteadily obeys
them both; no otherwise does the daughter of Thestius fluctuate between two varying affections, and in turn lays by her anger, and rouses
it again, when thus laid by. Still, the sister begins to get the
better of the parent; and that, with blood she may appease the shades of
her relations, in her unnatural conduct she proves affectionate. For after the pernicious flames gained strength, she said, “Let this
funeral pile consume my entrails.” And as she was holding the fatal
billet in her ruthless hand, she stood, in her wretchedness, before the
sepulchral altars, 68 and said, “Ye Eumenides, 69 the three Goddesses
of punishment, turn your faces towards these baleful rites; I am
both avenging and am committing a crime. With death must death be
expiated; crime must be added to crime, funeral to funeral; by
accumulated calamities, let this unnatural race perish. Shall Œneus, in
happiness, be blessed in his victorious son; and shall Thestius be
childless? It is better that you both should mourn. Only do ye, ghosts
of my brothers, phantoms newly made, regard this my act of affection,
and receive this funeral offering, 70 provided at a cost so great, the
guilty pledge of my womb. Ah, wretched me! Whither am I hurried away?
Pardon, my brothers, the feelings of a mother. My hands fail me
in my 284 viii. 492-522. purpose, I confess that he deserves to die; but the author of his
death is repugnant to me. Shall he then go unpunished? Alive and
victorious, and flushed with his success, shall he possess the realms of
Calydon? And shall you lie, a little heap of ashes, and as lifeless phantoms? For my part, I will not endure this.
Let the guilty wretch perish, and let him carry along with him the hopes
of his father, 71 and the ruin of his kingdom and country. But where are the feelings of a mother, where are the affectionate ties of
the parent? Where, too, are the pangs which for twice five months 72 I have endured? Oh, that thou hadst been burnt, when an infant, in
that first fire! And would that I had allowed it! By my aid hast thou
lived; now, for thy own deserts, shalt thou die. Take the reward of thy
deeds; and return to me that life which was twice given thee, first at
thy birth, next when the billet was rescued; or else place me as well in
the tomb of my brothers. I both desire to do it , and I am
unable. What shall I do? one while the wounds of my brothers are before
my eyes, and the form of a murder so dreadful; at another time,
affection and the name of mother break my resolution. Wretch that I am!
To my sorrow, brothers, will you prevail; but still prevail; so
long as I myself shall follow the appeasing sacrifice that I shall give
you, and you yourselves;” she thus said, and turning herself
away, with trembling right hand she threw the fatal brand into the midst
of the flames. That billet either utters, or seems to utter, a groan, and,
caught by the reluctant flames, it is consumed. Unsuspecting, and at a
distance, Meleager is burned by that flame, and feels his entrails
scorched by the secret fires; but with fortitude he supports the mighty
pain. Still, he grieves that he dies by an inglorious death, and without shedding his blood, and says that the wounds of Ancæus were a
happy lot. And while, with a sigh, he calls upon his aged father, and
his brother, and his affectionate sisters, and with his last words the
companion of his bed, 73 perhaps, too, his mother as well ; 285 viii. 522-545. the fire and his torments increase; and then again do they
diminish. Both of them are extinguished together, and by degrees his
spirit vanishes into the light air. Lofty Calydon now lies prostrate. Young and old mourn, both
people and nobles lament; and the Calydonian matrons of Evenus, 74 tearing their hair, bewail him. Lying along upon the ground, his father
pollutes his white hair and his aged features with dust, and chides his
prolonged existence. But her own hand, conscious to itself of the
ruthless deed, exacted punishment of the mother, the sword piercing her
entrails. 75 If a God had given me a mouth sounding with a hundred
tongues, and an enlarged genius, and the whole of Helicon besides ; still I could not enumerate the mournful
expressions of his unhappy sisters. Regardless of shame, they beat their
livid bosoms, and while the body still exists, they embrace it,
and embrace it again; they give kisses to it, and they give
kisses to the bier there set. After he is reduced to ashes, they pour them, when gathered up, to their breasts; and they lie
prostrate around the tomb, and kissing his name cut out in the stone,
they pour their tears upon his name. Them, the daughter of Latona, at
length satiated with the calamities of the house of Parthaon, 76 bears
aloft on wings springing from their bodies, except Gorge, 77 and the
daughter-in-law of noble Alcmena; and she stretches long wings over
their arms, and makes their mouths horny, and sends them, thus transformed, through the air. EXPLANATION. It is generally supposed that the story of the chase of the Calydonian
boar, though embracing much of the fabulous, is still based upon
historical facts. Homer, in the 9th book of the Iliad, alludes to it,
though in somewhat 286 viii. 546-558. different terms from the account here given by Ovid; and from the
ancient historians we learn, that Œneus, offering the first fruits to
the Gods, forgot Diana in his sacrifices. A wild boar, the same
year having ravaged some part of his dominions, and particularly a
vineyard, on the cultivation of which he had bestowed much pains, these
circumstances, combined, gave occasion for saying that the boar had been
sent by Diana. As the wild beast had killed some country people,
Meleager collected the neighbouring nobles, for the purpose of
destroying it. Plexippus and Toxeus, having been killed, in the manner
mentioned by the Poet, Althæa, their sister, in her grief, devoted her
son to the Furies; and, perhaps, having used some magical incantations,
the story of the fatal billet was invented. Homer does not mention the death of Meleager; but, on the contrary, says
that his mother, Althæa, was pacified. Some writers, however, think that
he really was poisoned by his mother. The story of the change of the
sisters of Meleager into birds is only the common poetical fiction,
denoting the extent of their grief at the untimely death of their
brother. FABLE V. Theseus , returning from the chase of
the Calydonian boar, is stopped by an inundation of the river Acheloüs,
and accepts of an invitation from the God of that river, to come to his
grotto. After the repast, Acheloüs gives him the history of the five
Naiads, who had been changed into the islands called Echinades, and an
account of his own amour with the Nymph Perimele, whom, being thrown by
her father into the sea, Neptune had transformed into an island. In the meantime, Theseus having performed his part in the joint
labour, was going to the Erecthean towers of Tritonis. But Acheloüs, swollen with rains, opposed his journey, 78 and caused him
delay as he was going. “Come,” said he , “famous Cecropian, beneath my roof; and do not
trust thyself to
the rapid floods. They are wont to bear away strong beams, and to roll
down stones, as they lie across, with immense roaring. I have seen
high folds, contiguous to my banks, swept away, together with the
flocks; nor was it of any avail there for the herd to be strong, nor for
the horses to be swift. Many bodies, too, of young men has this torrent
overwhelmed in its whirling eddies, when the snows of the mountains
dissolved. Rest is the safer for thee ; until the river runs
within its usual bounds, until its own channel receives the flowing
waters.” 287 viii. 559-591. To this the son of Ægeus agreed; and replied, “I will
make use of thy dwelling and of thy advice, Acheloüs;” and both he did
make use of. He entered an abode built of pumice stone with its many
holes, and the sand-stone far from smooth. The floor was moist with soft
moss, shells with alternate rows of murex arched the roof. And
now, Hyperion having measured out two parts of the light, Theseus and
the companions of his labours lay down upon couches; on the one side the
son of Ixion, 79 on the other, Lelex, the hero of Trœzen, having his
temples now covered with thin grey hairs; and some others whom the river
of the Acarnanians, overjoyed with a guest so great, had graced with the
like honour. Immediately, some Nymphs, barefoot, furnished with the
banquet the tables that were set before them; and the dainties being
removed, they served up wine in bowls adorned with gems. Then the
mighty hero, surveying the seas that lay beneath his eyes, said, “What
place is this?” and he pointed with his finger; “and inform me what name
that island bears; although it does not seem to be one only?” In answer
to these words, the River said, “It is not, indeed, one object that we
see; five countries lie there ; they deceive through their
distance. And that thou mayst be the less surprised at the deeds of the
despised Diana, these were Naiads; who, when they had slain twice five
bullocks, and had invited the Gods of the country to a sacrifice, kept a
joyous festival, regardless of me. At this I swelled, and I was
as great as I ever am, in my course, when I am the fullest; and,
redoubled both in rage and in flood, I tore away woods from woods,
and fields from fields; and together with the spot, I hurled the
Nymphs 80 into the sea, who then, at last, were mindful of me.
My waves and those of the main divided the land, before continuous, and separated it into as many parts, as thou seest islands, called Echinades, in the midst of the waves. “But yet, as thou thyself seest from afar, one island, see! was
withdrawn far off from the rest, an island pleasing to me. The
mariner calls it Perimele. 81 This beloved Nymph did I deprive 288 viii. 591-610. of the name of a virgin. This her father, Hippodamas, took amiss, and
pushed the body of his daughter, when about to bring forth, from a rock,
into the sea. I received her; and bearing her up when swimming,
I said, ‘O thou bearer of the Trident, who hast obtained, by lot,
next in rank to the heavens, the realms of the flowing waters, in which
we sacred rivers end, and to which we run; come hither, Neptune,
and graciously listen to me, as I pray. Her, whom I am bearing up,
I have injured. If her father, Hippodamas, had been mild and
reasonable, or if he had been less unnatural, he ought to have pitied
her, and to have forgiven me. Give thy assistance; and grant a place,
Neptune, I beseech thee, to her, plunged in the waters by the
cruelty of her father; or allow her to become a place herself. Her,
even, thus will I embrace.’ The King of the ocean moved his head,
and shook all the waters with his assent. The Nymph was afraid; but yet
she swam. Her breast, as she was swimming, I myself touched, as it
throbbed with a tremulous motion; and while I felt it, I perceived
her whole body grow hard, and her breast become covered with earth
growing over it. While I was speaking, fresh earth enclosed her floating
limbs, and a heavy island grew upon her changed members.” EXPLANATION. This story is simply based upon physical grounds. The river Acheloüs,
running between Acarnania and Ætolia, and flowing into the Ionian Sea,
carried with it a great quantity of sand and mud, which probably formed
the islands at its mouth, called the Echinades. The same solution
probably applies to the narrative of the fate of the Nymph Perimele. FABLE VI. Jupiter and Mercury, disguised in human
shape, are received by Philemon and Baucis, after having been refused
admittance by their neighbours. The Gods, in acknowledgment of their
hospitality, transform their cottage into a temple, of which, at their
own request, they are made the priest and priestess; and, after a long
life, the worthy couple are changed into trees. The village where they
live is laid under water, on account of the impiety of the inhabitants,
and is turned into a lake. Acheloüs here relates the surprising changes
of Proteus. After these things the river was silent. The wondrous deed 289 viii. 613-642. had astonished them all. The son of Ixion laughed at them, 82 believing the story ; and as he was a despiser of the Gods, and of
a haughty disposition, he said, “Acheloüs, thou dost relate a fiction,
and dost deem the Gods more powerful than they are, if they both give
and take away the form of things .” At this all were
amazed, and did not approve of such language; and before all, Lelex,
ripe in understanding and age, spoke thus: “The power of heaven is
immense, and has no limits; and whatever the Gods above will, ’tis
done. “And that thou mayst the less doubt of this , there is upon the
Phrygian hills, an oak near to the lime tree, enclosed by a low wall. 83 I, myself, have seen the spot; for Pittheus sent me into the land of
Pelops, once governed by his father, Pelops . Not far thence is a
standing water, formerly habitable ground, but now frequented by
cormorants and coots, that delight in fens. Jupiter came hither in the
shape of a man, and together with his parent, the grandson of Atlas, Mercury , the bearer of the Caduceus, having laid aside his wings.
To a thousand houses did they go, asking for lodging and for rest.
A thousand houses did the bolts fasten against them . Yet one
received them, a small one indeed, thatched with straw, 84 and the
reeds of the marsh. But a pious old woman named Baucis, and
Philemon of a like age, were united in their youthful years in that cottage , and in it, they grew old together; and by owning their
poverty, they rendered it light, and not to be endured with discontented
mind. It matters not, whether you ask for the masters there, or for the
servants; the whole family are but two; the same persons both obey and
command. When, therefore, the inhabitants of heaven reached this little
abode, and, bending their necks, entered the humble door, the old man
bade them rest their limbs on a bench set there ; upon which the
attentive Baucis threw a coarse cloth. Then she moves the warm embers on
the hearth, and stirs 290 viii. 642-669. up the fire they had had the day before, and supplies it with leaves and
dry bark, and with her aged breath kindles it into a flame; and brings
out of the house faggots split into many pieces, and dry bits of
branches, and breaks them, and puts them beneath a small boiler. Some
pot-herbs, too, which her husband has gathered in the well-watered
garden, she strips of their leaves. “With a two-pronged fork Philemon lifts down 85 a rusty
side of bacon, that hangs from a black beam; and cuts off a small
portion from the chine that has been kept so long; and when cut, softens
it in boiling water. In the meantime, with discourse they beguile the
intervening hours; and suffer not the length of time to be perceived.
There is a beechen trough there, that hangs on a peg by its crooked
handle; this is filled with warm water, and receives their limbs to
refresh them. On the middle of the couch, its feet and frame 86 being
made of willow, is placed a cushion of soft sedge. This they cover with
cloths, which they have not been accustomed to place there but on
festive occasions; but even these cloths are coarse and old, though not unfitting for a couch of willow. The Gods seat
themselves. The old woman, wearing an apron, and shaking with
palsy , sets the table before them . But the third leg of the
table is too short; a potsherd, placed beneath , makes it
equal. After this, being placed beneath, has taken away the inequality,
green mint rubs down the table thus made level. Here are set the
double-tinted berries 87 of the chaste Minerva, and cornel-berries,
gathered in autumn, and preserved in a thin pickle; endive, too,
and radishes, and a large piece of curdled milk, and eggs, that have
been gently turned in the slow embers; all served in earthenware.
After this, an embossed goblet of 291 viii. 669-599. similar clay is placed there ; cups, too, made of beech wood,
varnished, where they are hollowed out, with yellow wax. “There is now a short pause; 88 the fire then sends up
the warm repast; and wine kept no long time, is again put on; and then , set aside for a little time, it gives place to the second
course. Here are nuts, and here are dried figs mixed with
wrinkled dates, plums too, and fragrant apples in wide baskets, and
grapes gathered from the purple vines. In the middle there is white
honey-comb. Above all, there are welcome looks, and no indifferent and
niggardly feelings. In the meanwhile, as oft as Baucis and the alarmed
Philemon behold the goblet, when drunk off, replenish itself of
its own accord, and the wine increase of itself, astonished at this
singular event, they are frightened, and, with hands held up, they offer
their prayers, and entreat pardon for their entertainment, and their
want of preparation. There was a single goose, the guardian of their
little cottage, which its owners were preparing to kill for the Deities,
their guests. Swift with its wings, it wearied them, rendered slow by age, and it escaped them a long time, and at length seemed to
fly for safety to the Gods themselves. The immortals forbade it 89 to be
killed, and said, ‘We are Divinities, and this impious neighbourhood
shall suffer deserved punishment. To you it will be allowed to be free
from this calamity; only leave your habitation, and attend our steps,
and go together to the summit of the mountain.’ “They both obeyed; and, supported by staffs, they endeavoured to
place their feet on the top of the high hill. They were now as far from the top, as an arrow discharged can go at once, when they turned their eyes, and beheld the other parts sinking
in a morass, and their own abode alone remaining. While they were
wondering at these things, and while they were bewailing the fate
of their fellow countrymen , that old cottage of theirs , 292 viii. 699-734. too little for even two owners, was changed into a temple.
Columns took the place of forked stakes, the thatch grew yellow, and the
earth was covered with marble; the doors appeared carved, and the roof
to be of gold. Then, the son of Saturn uttered such words as these with
benign lips: ‘Tell us, good old man, and thou, wife, worthy of a husband so good, what it is you desire?’ Having spoken a few words to
Baucis, Philemon discovered their joint request to the Gods: ‘We desire
to be your priests, and to have the care of your temple; and, since we
have passed our years in harmony, let the same hour take us off both
together; and let me not ever see the tomb of my wife, nor let me be
destined to be buried by her.’ Fulfilment attended their wishes. So long
as life was granted, they were the keepers of the temple; and when,
enervated by years and old age, they were standing, by chance, before
the sacred steps, and were relating the fortunes of the spot, Baucis
beheld Philemon, and the aged Philemon saw Baucis, too , shooting
into leaf. And now the tops of the trees growing above their two faces,
so long as they could they exchanged words with each other, and said
together, ‘Farewell! my spouse;’ and at the same moment the branches
covered their concealed faces. The inhabitants of Tyana 90 still shew
these adjoining trees, made of their two bodies. Old men, no romancers,
(and there was no reason why they should wish to deceive me) told me
this. I, indeed, saw garlands hanging on the branches, and placing there some fresh ones myself , I said, ‘The good are
the peculiar care of the Gods, and those who worshipped the
Gods , are now worshipped themselves .’” He had now ceased; and the thing itself and the relator of it had astonished them all; and especially Theseus,
whom, desiring to hear of the wonderful actions of the Gods, the
Calydonian river leaning on his elbow, addressed in words such as these:
“There are, O most valiant hero , some things, whose form has
been once changed, and then has continued under that change.
There are some whose privilege it is to pass into many shapes, as thou,
Proteus, inhabitant of the sea that embraces the earth. For people have
seen thee one while a young man, and again a lion; at one time thou wast
a furious boar, at another a serpent, which they dreaded to touch; and 293 viii 734-736. sometimes, horns rendered thee a bull. Ofttimes thou mightst be seen as
a stone; often, too, as a tree. Sometimes imitating the appearance of
flowing water, thou wast a river; sometimes fire, the very contrary of water.” EXPLANATION. The story of Baucis and Philemon, which is here so beautifully related
by the Poet, is a moral tale, which shows the merit of hospitality, and
how, in some cases at least, virtue speedily brings its own reward. If
the story is based upon any actual facts, the history of its origin is
entirely unknown. Huet, the theologian, indeed, supposes that it is
founded on the history of the reception of the Angels by Abraham. This
is a bold surmise, but entirely in accordance with his position, that
the greatest part of the fictions of the heathen mythology were mere
glosses or perversions of the histories of the Old Testament. If derived
from Scripture, the story is just as likely to be founded on the
hospitable reception of the Prophet Elijah by the woman of Zarephath;
and the miraculous increase of the wine in the goblet, calls to mind
‘the barrel of meal that wasted not, and the cruse of oil that did not
fail.’ The story of the wretched fate of the inhospitable neighbours of
Baucis and Philemon is thought, by some modern writers, to be founded
upon the Scriptural account of the destruction of the wicked cities of
the plain. Ancient writers have made many attempts to solve the wondrous story of
Proteus. Some say that he was an elegant orator, who charmed his
auditors by the force of his eloquence. Lucian says that he was an actor
of pantomime, so supple that he could assume various postures.
Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and Clement of Alexandria, assert that he
was an ancient king of Egypt, successor to Pheron, and that he lived at
the time, of the Trojan war. Herodotus, who represents him as a prince
of great wisdom and justice, does not make any allusion to his powers of
transformation, which was his great merit in the eyes of the poets.
Diodorus Siculus says that his alleged changes may have had their rise
in a custom which Proteus had of adorning his helmet, sometimes with the
skin of a panther, sometimes with that of a lion, and sometimes with
that of a serpent, or of some other animal. When Lycophron states that
Neptune saved Proteus from the fury of his children, by making him go
through caverns from Pallene to Egypt, he follows the tradition which
says that he originally came from that town in Thessaly, and that he
retired thence to Egypt. Virgil, and Servius, his Commentator, assert
that Proteus returned to Thessaly after the death of his children, who
were slain by Hercules; in which assertion, however, they are not
supported by Homer or Herodotus. 294 viii. 737-759. FABLE VII. Acheloüs continues his narrative with
the story of Metra, the daughter of Erisicthon, who is attacked with
insatiable hunger, for having cut down an oak, in one of the groves of
Ceres. Metra begs of Neptune, who was formerly in love with her, the
power of transforming herself into different shapes; that she may be
enabled, if possible, to satisfy the voracious appetite of her father.
By these means, Erisicthon, being obliged to expose her for sale, in
order to purchase himself food, always recovers her again; until, by his
repeated sale of her, the fraud is discovered. He at last becomes the
avenger of his own impiety, by devouring his own limbs. “Nor has the wife of Autolycus, 91 the daughter of Erisicthon, less
privileges than he . Her father was one who despised the majesty
of the Gods; and he offered them no honours on their altars. He is
likewise said to have profaned with an axe a grove of Ceres, and to have
violated her ancient woods with the iron. In these there was standing an
oak with an ancient trunk, a wood in itself alone, fillets
and tablets, as memorials, 92 and garlands, proofs of wishes that
had been granted, surrounded the middle of it. Often, beneath this tree , did the Dryads lead up the festive dance; often, too, with
hands joined in order, did they go round the compass of its trunk; and
the girth of the oak made up three times five ells. The rest of the
wood, too, lay as much under this oak as the grass lay beneath the whole
of the wood. Yet not on that account even did the son of
Triopas 93 withhold the axe from it; and he ordered his servants
to cut down the sacred oak; and when he saw them hesitate, thus ordered, the wicked wretch , snatching from one of them an axe,
uttered these words: ‘Were it not only beloved by a Goddess, but even
were it a Goddess itself, it should now touch the ground with its leafy
top.’ Thus he said; and while he was poising his weapon for a
side stroke, the Deoïan oak 94 shuddered, and uttered a groan; and 295 viii. 759-793. at once, its green leaves, and, with them, its acorns began to turn
pale; and the long branches to be moistened with sweat. As soon as his
impious hand had made an incision in its trunk, the blood flowed from
the severed bark no otherwise than, as, at the time when the bull,
a large victim, falls before the altars, the blood pours forth from
his divided neck. All were amazed and one of the number attempted to
hinder the wicked design, and to restrain the cruel axe. The Thessalian
eyes him, and says, ‘Take the reward of thy pious intentions,’ and turns
the axe from the tree upon the man, and hews off his head; and then hacks at the oak again; when such words as these are uttered
from the middle of the oak: ‘I, a Nymph, 95 most pleasing to
Ceres, am beneath this wood; I, now dying, foretell to thee that
the punishment of thy deeds, the solace of my death, is at hand.’ “He pursued his wicked design; and, at last, weakened by numberless
blows, and pulled downward with ropes, the tree fell down, and with its
weight levelled a great part of the wood. All her sisters, the Dryads,
being shocked at the loss of the grove and their own, in their grief
repaired to Ceres, in black array, 96 and requested the punishment of
Erisicthon. She assented to their request , and the most beauteous
Goddess, with the nodding of her head, shook the fields loaded with the
heavy crops; and contrived for him a kind of punishment,
lamentable, if he had not, for his crimes, been deserving of the
sympathy of none, namely , to torment him with deadly Famine. And
since that Goddess could not be approached by herself (for the Destinies
do not allow Ceres and Famine to come together), in such words as these
she addressed rustic Oreas, one of the mountain Deities: ‘There is an
icy region in the extreme part of Scythia, a dreary soil,
a land, desolate, without corn and without trees; there
dwell drowsy Cold, and Paleness, and Trembling, and famishing Hunger;
order her to bury herself in the breast of this sacrilegious wretch . Let no abundance of provisions overcome her; 296 viii. 793-824. and let her surpass my powers in the contest. And that the length of the
road may not alarm thee, take my chariot, take the dragons, which thou
mayst guide aloft with the reins;’ and then she gave them to
her. “She, borne through the air on the chariot thus granted,
arrived in Scythia; and, on the top of a steep mountain (they call it
Caucasus), she unyoked the neck of the dragons, and beheld Famine, whom
she was seeking, in a stony field, tearing up herbs, growing here and
there, with her nails and with her teeth. Rough was her hair, her eyes
hollow, paleness on her face, her lips white with scurf, 97 her jaws rough
with rustiness; her skin hard, through which her bowels might be seen;
her dry bones were projecting beneath her crooked loins; instead of a
belly, there was only the place for a belly. You would think her
breast was hanging, and was only supported from the chine 98 of the
back. Leanness had, to appearance , increased her joints, and the
caps of her knees were stiff, and excrescences projected from her
overgrown ancles. Soon as Oreas beheld her at a distance (for she
did not dare come near her), she delivered the commands of the Goddess;
and, staying for so short a time, although she was at a distance from
her, and although she had just come thither, still did she seem
to feel hunger; and, turning the reins, she drove aloft the dragon’s
back to Hæmonia. “Famine executes the orders of Ceres (although she is ever opposing
her operations), and is borne by the winds through the air to the
assigned abode, and immediately enters the bedchamber of the
sacrilegious wretch , and embraces him, sunk in a deep sleep
( for it is night-time), with her two wings. She breathes herself
into the man, and blows upon his jaws, and his breast, and his face; and
she scatters hunger through his empty veins. And having thus executed her commission, she forsakes the fruitful world, and returns to
her famished abode, her wonted fields. Gentle sleep is still soothing 99 Erisicthon with its balmy wings. In a vision of his 297 viii. 824-857. sleep he craves for food, and moves his jaws to no purpose, and tires
his teeth grinding upon teeth, and wearies his throat deluded
with imaginary food; and, instead of victuals, he devours in vain the
yielding air. But when sleep is banished, his desire for eating is
outrageous, and holds sway over his craving jaws, and his insatiate
entrails. And no delay is there ; he calls what the sea, what the
earth, what the air produces, and complains of hunger with the tables
set before him, and requires food in the midst of food. And what
might be enough for whole cities, and what might be enough for a whole people, is not sufficient for one man. The more, too,
he swallows down into his stomach, the more does he desire. And just as
the ocean receives rivers from the whole earth, and yet is not
satiated with water, and drinks up the rivers of distant countries, and
as the devouring fire never refuses fuel, and burns up beams of wood
without number, and the greater the quantity that is given to it, the
more does it crave, and it is the more voracious through the very
abundance of fuel ; so do the jaws of the impious Erisicthon
receive all victuals presented , and at the same time ask for more . In him all food is only a ground for more food, and there is always room vacant for eating still more . “And now, through his appetite, and the voracity of his capacious
stomach, he had diminished his paternal estate; but yet, even then, did
his shocking hunger remain undiminished, and the craving of his
insatiable appetite continued in full vigour. At last, after he has
swallowed down his estate into his paunch, 100 his daughter alone is remaining, undeserving of him for a father; her, too, he
sells, pressed by want. Born of a noble race, she cannot brook a master;
and stretching out her hands, over the neighbouring sea, she says,
‘Deliver me from a master, thou who dost possess the prize of my
ravished virginity.’ This prize Neptune had possessed himself
of . He, not despising her prayer, although, the moment before, she
has been seen by her master in pursuit of her, both alters her form, and
gives her the appearance of a man, and a habit befitting such as catch
fish. Looking at her, her master says, ‘O thou manager of the rod, who
dost cover the brazen hook , as it hangs, with tiny morsels, even
so may the sea be smooth for thee , 298 viii. 857-884. even so may the fish in the water be ever credulous for thee, and
may they perceive no hook till caught; tell me where she is, who this
moment was standing upon this shore (for standing on the shore I saw
her), with her hair dishevelled, and in humble garb; for no
further do her footsteps extend.’ She perceives that the favour of the
God has turned to good purpose, and, well pleased that she is inquired
after of herself, she replies to him, as he inquires, in these words:
‘Whoever thou art, excuse me, but I have not turned my eyes on
any side from this water, and, busily employed, I have been
attending to my pursuit. And that thou mayst the less disbelieve me , may the God of the sea so aid this employment of mine, no man
has been for some time standing on this shore, myself only excepted, nor
has any woman been standing here .’ Her master believed her, and, turning his feet to
go away , he paced the sands, and, thus deceived, withdrew.
Her own shape was restored to her. “But when her father found that his daughter had a body
capable of being transformed, he often sold the grand-daughter of
Triopas to other masters. But she used to escape, sometimes as a
mare, sometimes as a bird, now as a cow, now as a stag; and so provided a dishonest maintenance for her hungry parent. Yet, after this
violence of his distemper had consumed all his provision, and had added
fresh fuel to his dreadful malady: he himself, with mangling bites,
began to tear his own limbs, and the miserable wretch used to
feed his own body by diminishing it. But why do I dwell on the
instances of others? I, too, O youths, 101 have a power of
often changing my body, though limited in the number of those
changes . For, one while, I appear what I now am, another while
I am wreathed as a snake; then as the leader of a herd,
I receive strength in my horns. In my horns, I say , so
long as I could. Now, one side of my forehead is deprived of its
weapons, as thou seest thyself.” Sighs followed his words. EXPLANATION. The story of Metra and Erisicthon has no other foundation, in all
probability, than the diligent care which she took, as a dutiful
daughter, to 299 support her father, when he had ruined himself by his luxury and
extravagance. She, probably, was a young woman, who, in the hour of
need, could, in common parlance, ‘turn her hand’ to any useful
employment. Some, however, suppose that, by her changes are meant the
wages she received from those whom she served in the capacity of a
slave, and which she gave to her father; and it must be remembered that,
in ancient times, as money was scarce, the wages of domestics were often
paid in kind. Other writers again suggest, less to the credit of the
damsel, that her changes denote the price she received for her
debaucheries. Ovid adds, that she married Autolycus, the robber, who
stole the oxen of Eurytus. Callimachus also, in his Hymn to Ceres, gives
the story of Erisicthon at length. He was the great grandfather of
Ulysses, and was probably a man noted for his infidelity and impiety, as
well as his riotous course of life. The story is probably of Eastern
origin, and if a little expanded might vie with many of the interesting
fictions which we read in the Arabian Night’s Entertainments. 1. The East wind. ]—Ver. 2. Eurus, or the East wind, while
blowing, would prevent the return of Cephalus from the island of Ægina
to Athens. 2. The sons of Æacus. ]—Ver. 4. ‘Æacidis’ may mean either the
forces sent by Æacus, or his sons Telamon and Peleus, in command of
those troops. It has been well observed, that ‘redeuntibus,’
‘returning,’ is here somewhat improperly applied to the troops of Æacus,
for they were not, strictly speaking, returning to Athens although
Cephalus was. 3. Lelegeian coasts. ]—Ver. 6. Of Megara, which is also called
Alcathoë, from Alcathoüs, its restorer. 4. Of Latona. ]—Ver. 15. The story was, that when Alcathoüs was
rebuilding the walls of Megara, Apollo assisted him, and laying down his
lyre among the stones, its tones were communicated to them. 5. Cydonean. ]—Ver 22. From Cydon, a city of Crete. 6. His slain son. ]—Ver. 58. Namely, his son Androgeus, who had
been put to death, as already mentioned . 7. He thus spoke. ]—Ver. 101. The poet omits the continuation
of the siege by Minos, and how he took Megara by storm, as not
pertaining to the developement of his story. 8. Inhospitable Syrtis. ]—Ver. 120. There were two famous
quicksands, or ‘Syrtes,’ in the Mediterranean Sea, near the coast of
Africa; the former near Cyrene, and the latter near Byzacium, which were
known by the name of ‘Syrtis Major’ and ‘Syrtis Minor.’ The inhabitants
of the neighbouring coasts were savage and inhospitable, and subsisted
by plundering the shipwrecked vessels. 9. Armenian. ]—Ver. 121. Armenia was a country of Asia, lying
between Mount Taurus and the Caucasian chain, and extending from
Cappadocia to the Caspian Sea. It was divided into the greater and the
less Armenia, the one to the East, the other to the West. Its tigers
were noted for their extreme fierceness. 10. She is truly worthy. ]—Ver. 131. Pasiphaë, who was the
mother of the Minotaur. 11. She is called Ciris. ]—Ver. 151. From the Greek word κείρω , ‘to clip,’ or ‘cut.’
According to Virgil, who, in his Ciris, describes this transformation,
this bird was of variegated colours, with a purple breast, and legs of a
reddish hue, and lived a solitary life in retired spots. It is uncertain
what kind of bird it was; some think it was a hawk, some a lark, and
others a partridge. It has been suggested that Ovid did not enter into
the details of this transformation, because it had been so recently
depicted in beautiful language by Virgil. Hyginus says that the ‘Ciris’
was a fish. 12. Of a youth. ]—Ver. 169. Clarke translates this line, ‘In
which, after he had shut the double figure of a bull and a young
fellow.’ 13. Sets sail for Dia. ]—Ver. 174. Dia was another name of the
island of Naxos, one of the Cyclades, where Theseus left Ariadne.
Commentators have complained, with some justice, that Ovid has here
omitted the story of Ariadne; but it should be remembered that he has
given it at length in the third book of the Fasti, commencing at line
460. 14. In the middle. ]—Ver. 182. The crown of Ariadne was made a
Constellation between those of Hercules and Ophiuchus. Some writers say,
that the crown was given by Bacchus to Ariadne as a marriage present;
while others state that it was made by Vulcan of gold and Indian jewels,
by the light of which Theseus was aided in his escape from the
labyrinth, and that he afterwards presented it to Ariadne. Some authors,
and Ovid himself, in the Fasti, represent Ariadne herself as becoming a
Constellation. 15. Resting on his knee. ]—Ver. 182. Hercules, as a
Constellation, is represented in the attitude of kneeling, when about to
slay the dragon that watched the gardens of the Hesperides. 16. His prolonged exile. ]—Ver. 184. Dædalus had been exiled for
murdering one of his scholars in a fit of jealousy; probably Perdix, his
nephew, whose story is related by Ovid. 17. Helice. ]—Ver. 207. This was another name of the
Constellation called the Greater Bear, into which Calisto had been
changed. 18. Samos. ]—Ver. 220. This island, off the coast of Caria in
Asia Minor, was famous as the birth-place of Juno, and the spot where
she was married to Jupiter. She had a famous temple there . 19. Lebynthus. ]—Ver. 222. This island was one of the Cyclades,
or, according to some writers, one of the Sporades, a group that
lay between the Cyclades and Crete. 20. Calymne. ]—Ver. 222. This island was near Rhodes. Its honey
is praised by Strabo. 21. Received its name. ]—Ver. 230. The island of Samos being
near the spot where he fell, received the name of Icaria. 22. Branching holm oak . ]—Ver. 237. Ovid here forgot that
partridges do not perch in trees; a fact, which, however, he
himself remarks in line 257 . 23. Cocalus. ]—Ver. 261. He was the king of Sicily, who received
Dædalus with hospitality. 24. And censers. ]—Ver. 265. Acerris. The ‘acerra’ was properly
a box used for holding incense for the purposes of sacrifice, which was
taken from it, and placed on the burning altar. According to Festus, the
word meant a small altar, which was placed before the dead, and on which
perfumes were burnt. The Law of the Twelve Tables restricted the use of
‘acerræ’ at funerals. 25. Meleager. ]—Ver. 270. He was the son of Œneus, king of
Calydon, a city of Ætolia, who had offended Diana by neglecting her
rites. 26. Palladian juice. ]—Ver. 275. Oil, the extraction of which,
from the olive, Minerva had taught to mortals. 27. Epirus. ]—Ver. 283. This country, sometimes also called
Chaonia, was on the north of Greece, between Macedonia, Thessaly, and
the Ionian sea, comprising the greater part of what is now called
Albania. It was famous for its oxen. According to Pliny the Elder,
Pyrrhus, its king, paid particular attention to improving the breed. 28. Bristles too. ]—Ver. 285. This line, or the following one,
is clearly an interpolation, and ought to be omitted. 29. Palisades. ]—Ver. 286. The word ‘vallum’ is found applied
either to the whole, or a portion only, of the fortifications of a Roman
camp. It is derived from ‘vallus,’ ‘a stake;’ and properly means the
palisade which ran along the outer edge of the ‘agger,’ or ‘mound:’ but
it frequently includes the ‘agger’ also. The ‘vallum,’ in the latter
sense, together with the ‘fossa,’ or ‘ditch,’ which surrounded the camp
outside of the ‘vallum,’ formed a complete fortification. 30. Sons of Tyndarus. ]—Ver. 301. These were Castor and Pollux,
the putative sons of Tyndarus, but really the sons of Jupiter, who
seduced Leda under the form of a swan. According to some, however,
Pollux only was the son of Jupiter. Castor was skilled in horsemanship,
while Pollux excelled in the use of the cestus. 31. Pirithoüs. ]—Ver. 303. He was the son of Ixion of Larissa,
and the bosom friend of Theseus. 32. Sons of Thestius. ]—Ver. 304. These were Toxeus and
Plexippus, the uncles of Meleager, and the brothers of Althæa, who
avenged their death in the manner afterwards described by Ovid.
Pausanias calls them Prothoüs and Cometes. Lactantius adds a third,
Agenor. 33. Lynceus. ]—Ver. 304. Lynceus and Idas were the sons of
Aphareus . From his
skill in physical science, the former was said to be able to see into
the interior of the earth. 34. Cæneus. ]—Ver. 305. This person was originally a female, by
name Cænis. At her request, she was changed by Neptune into a man, and
was made invulnerable. Her story is related at length in the 12th book
of the Metamorphoses. 35. Leucippus. ]—Ver. 306. He was the son of Perieres, and the
brother of Aphareus. His daughters were Elaira, or Ilaira, and Phœbe,
whom Castor and Pollux attempted to carry off. 36. Acastus. ]—Ver. 306. He was the son of Pelias, king of
Thessaly. 37. Hippothoüs. ]—Ver. 307. According to Hyginus, he was the son
of Geryon, or rather, according to Pausanias, of Cercyon. 38. Dryas. ]—Ver. 307. The son of Mars, or, according to some
writers, of Iapetus. 39. Phœnix. ]—Ver. 307. He was the son of Amyntor. Having
engaged in an intrigue, by the contrivance of his mother, with his
father’s mistress, he fled to the court of Peleus, king of Thessaly, who
entrusted to him the education of Achilles, and the command of the
Dolopians. He attended his pupil to the Trojan war, and became blind in
his latter years. 40. Two sons of Actor. ]—Ver. 308. These were Eurytus and
Cteatus, the sons of Actor, of Elis. They were afterwards slain by
Hercules. 41. Phyleus. ]—Ver. 308. He was the son of Augeas, king of Elis,
whose stables were cleansed by Hercules. 42. Telamon. ]—Ver. 309. He was the son of Æacus. Ajax Telamon
was his son. 43. Great Achilles. ]—Ver. 309. His father was Peleus, the
brother of Ajax, and the son of Æacus and Ægina. Peleus was famed for
his chastity. 44. The son of Pheres. ]—Ver. 310. This was Admetus, the son of
Pheres, of Pheræ, in Thessaly. 45. Hyantian Iolaüs. ]—Ver. 310. Iolaüs, the Bœotian, the son of
Iphiclus, aided Hercules in slaying the Hydra. 46. Eurytion. ]—Ver. 311. He was the son of Irus, and attended
the Argonautic expedition. 47. Echion. ]—Ver. 311. He was an Arcadian, the son of Mercury
and the Nymph Antianira, and was famous for his speed. 48. Narycian Lelex. ]—Ver. 312. So called from Naryx,
a city of the Locrians. 49. Panopeus. ]—Ver. 312. He was the son of Phocus, who built
the city of Panopæa, in Phocis, and was the father of Epytus, who
constructed the Trojan horse. 50. Hyleus. ]—Ver. 312. According to Callimachus, he was slain,
together with Rhœtus, by Atalanta, for making an attempt upon her
virtue. 51. Hippasus. ]—Ver. 313. He was a son of Eurytus. 52. Nestor. ]—Ver. 313. He was the son of Neleus and Chloris. He
was king of Pylos, and went to the Trojan war in his ninetieth, or, as
some writers say, in his two hundredth year. 53. Hippocoön. ]—Ver. 314. He was the son of Amycus. He sent his
four sons, Enæsimus, Alcon, Amycus, and Dexippus, to hunt the Calydonian
boar. The first was killed by the monster, and the other three, with
their father, were afterwards slain by Hercules. 54. Amyclæ. ]—Ver. 314. This was an ancient city of Laconia,
built by Amycla, the son of Lacedæmon. 55. Of Penelope. ]—Ver. 315. This was Laërtes, the father of
Ulysses, the husband of Penelope, and king of Ithaca. 56. Ancæus. ]—Ver. 315. He was an Arcadian, the son of
Lycurgus. 57. Son of Ampycus. ]—Ver. 316. Ampycus was the son of Titanor,
and the father of Mopsus, a famous soothsayer. 58. Descendant Œclus. ]—Ver. 317. This was Amphiaraüs, who,
having the gift of prophecy, foresaw that he would not live to return
from the Theban war; and, therefore, hid himself, that he might not be
obliged to join in the expedition. His wife, Eriphyle, being bribed by
Adrastus with a gold necklace, betrayed his hiding-place; on which,
proceeding to Thebes, he was swallowed up in the earth, together with
his chariot. Ovid refers here to the treachery of his wife. 59. Tegeæan. ]—Ver. 317. Atalanta was the daughter of Iasius,
and was a native of Tegeæa, in Arcadia. She was the mother of
Parthenopæus, by Meleager. She is thought, by some, to have been a
different person from Atalanta, the daughter of Schœneus, famed for her
swiftness in running, who is mentioned in the tenth book of the
Metamorphoses. 60. Son of Ampycus. ]—Ver. 350. Mopsus was a priest of
Apollo. 61. When it is aimed. ]—Ver. 357. When discharged from the
‘balista,’ or ‘catapulta,’ or other engine of war. 62. Eupalamus and Pelagon. ]—Ver. 360. They are not previously
named in the list of combatants; and nothing further is known of
them. 63. Would have perished. ]—Ver. 365. What is here told of
Nestor, one of the Commentators on Homer attributes to Thersites, who,
according to him, being the son of Agrius, the uncle of Meleager, was
present on this occasion. 64. Othriades. ]—Ver. 371. Nothing further is known of him. 65. Peleus. ]—Ver. 375. According to Apollodorus, Peleus
accidentally slew Eurytion on this occasion. 66. The Arcadian. ]—Ver. 391. This was Ancæus, who is mentioned
before, in line 215. 67. Warlike. ]—Ver. 437. ‘Mavortius’ may possibly mean ‘the son
of Mars,’ as, according to Hyginus, Mars was engaged in an intrigue with
Althæa. 68. Sepulchral altars. ]—Ver. 480. The ‘sepulchralis ara’ is the
funeral pile, which was built in the form of an altar, with four equal
sides. Ovid also calls it ‘funeris ara,’ in the Tristia, book iii. Elegy
xiii. line 21. 69. Eumenides. ]—Ver. 482. This name properly signifies ‘the
well-disposed,’ or ‘wellwishers,’ and was applied to the Furies by way
of euphemism, it being deemed unlucky to mention their names. 70. Funeral offering. ]—Ver. 490. The ‘inferiæ’ were sacrifices
offered to the shades of the dead. The Romans appear to have regarded
the souls of the departed as Gods; for which reason they presented them
wine, milk, and garlands, and offered them victims in sacrifice. 71. Hopes of his father. ]—Ver. 498. Œneus had other sons
besides Meleager, who were slain in the war that arose in consequence of
the death of Plexippus and Toxeus. Nicander says they were five in
number; Apollodorus names but three, Toxeus, Tyreus, and Clymenus. 72. Twice five months. ]—Ver. 500. That is, lunar months. 73. Of his bed. ]—Ver. 521. Antoninus Liberalis calls her
Cleopatra, but Hyginus says that her name was Alcyone. Homer, however,
reconciles this discrepancy, by saying that the original name of the
wife of Meleager was Cleopatra, but that she was called Alcyone, because
her mother had the same fate as Alcyone, or Halcyone. 74. Evenus. ]—Ver. 527. Evenus was a river of Ætolia. 75. Piercing her entrails. ]—Ver. 531. Hyginus says that she
hanged herself. 76. Parthaon. ]—Ver. 541. Parthaon was the grandfather of
Meleager and his sisters, Œneus being his son. 77. Gorge. ]—Ver. 542. Gorge married Andræmon, and Deïanira was
the wife of Hercules, the son of Alcmena. The two sisters of Meleager
who were changed into birds were Eurymede and Melanippe. 78. Opposed his journey. ]—Ver. 548. It has been objected to
this passage, that the river Acheloüs, which rises in Mount Pindus, and
divides Acarnania from Ætolia, could not possibly lie in the road of
Theseus, as he returned from Calydon to Athens. 79. Son of Ixion. ]—Ver. 566. Pirithoüs lay on the one side, and
Lelex on the other; the latter is called ‘Trœzenius,’ from the fact of
his having lived with Pittheus, the king of Trœzen. 80. I hurled the Nymphs. ]—Ver. 585. Clarke translates ‘Nymphas
in freta provolvi,’ ‘I tumbled the nymphs into the sea.’ 81. Perimele. ]—Ver. 590. According to Apollodorus, the name of
the wife of Acheloüs was Perimede; and she bore him two sons, Hippodamas
and Orestes. The Echinades were five small islands in the Ionian Sea,
near the coast of Acarnania, which are now called Curzolari. 82. Laughed at them. ]—Ver. 612. The Centaurs, from one of whom
Pirithoüs was sprung, were famed for their contempt of, and enmity to,
the Gods. 83. By a low wall. ]—Ver. 620. As a memorial of the wonderful
events here related by Lelex. 84. Thatched with straw. ]—Ver. 630. It was the custom with the
ancients, when reaping, to take off only the heads of the corn, and to
leave the stubble to be reaped at another time. From this passage, we
see that straw was used for the purpose of thatching. 85. Lifts down. ]—Ver. 647. The lifting down the flitch of bacon
might induce us to believe that the account of this story was written
yesterday, and not nearly two thousand years since. So true is it, that
there is nothing new under the sun. 86. Feet and frame. ]—Ver. 659. ‘Sponda.’ This was the frame of
the bedstead, and more especially the sides of it. In the case of a bed
used for two persons, the two sides were distinguished by different
names; the side at which they entered was open, and was called ‘sponda:’
the other side, which was protected by a board, was called ‘pluteus.’
The two sides were also called ‘torus exterior,’ or ‘sponda exterior,’
and ‘torus interior,’ or ‘sponda interior.’ 87. Double-tinted berries. ]—Ver. 664. Green on one side, and
swarthy on the other. 88. A short pause. ]—Ver. 671. This was the second course. The
Roman ‘cœna,’ or chief meal, consisted of three stages. First, the
‘promulsis,’ ‘antecœna,’ or ‘gustatio,’ when they ate such things as
served to stimulate the appetite. Then came the first course, which
formed the substantial part of the meal; and next the second course, at
which the ‘bellaria,’ consisting of pastry and fruits, such as are now
used at dessert, were served. 89. Immortals forbade it. ]—Ver. 688. This act of humanity
reflects credit on the two Deities, and contrasts favourably with their
usual cruel and revengeful disposition, in common with their fellow
Divinities of the heathen Mythology. 90. Of Tyana. ]—Ver. 719. This was a city of Cappadocia, in Asia
Minor. 91. Autolycus. ]—Ver. 738. He was the father of Anticlea, the
mother of Ulysses, and was instructed by Mercury in the art of thieving.
His wife was Metra, whose transformations are here described by the
Poet. 92. Tablets as memorials. ]—Ver. 744. That is, they had
inscribed on them the grateful thanks of the parties who placed them
there to Ceres, for having granted their wishes. 93. Son of Triopas. ]—Ver. 751. Erisicthon was the son of
Triopas. 94. Deoïan oak. ]—Ver. 758. Belonging to Ceres. See Book vi.
line 114. 95. I, a Nymph. ]—Ver. 771. She was one of the Hamadryads, whose
lives terminated with those of the trees which they respectively
inhabited. 96. In black array. ]—Ver. 778. The Romans wore mourning for the
dead; which seems, in the time of the Republic, to have been black or
dark blue for either sex. Under the Empire, the men continued to wear
black, but the women wore white. On such occasions all ornaments were
laid aside. 97. With scurf. ]—Ver. 802. Clarke gives this translation of
‘Labra incana situ:’ ‘Her lips very white with nasty stuff.’ 98. From the chine. ]—Ver. 806. ‘A spinæ tantummodo crate
teneri,’ is translated by Clarke, ‘Was only supported by the wattling of
her backbone.’ 99. Is still soothing. ]—Ver. 823. Clarke renders the words
‘Lenis adhuc somnus—Erisicthona pennis mulcebat;’ ‘Gentle sleep as
yet clapped Erisicthon with her wings.’ 100. Into his paunch. ]—Ver . 846. Clarke translates ‘Tandem, demisso in viscera
censu ;’ ‘at last,
after he had swallowed down all his estate into his g—ts .’ 101. I too, O youths. ]—Ver. 880. Acheloüs is addressing
Theseus, Pirithoüs, and Lelex. The words, ‘Etiam mihi sæpe novandi
Corporis, O Juvenes,’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘I too,
gentlemen, have the power of changing my body.’ 300 BOOK THE NINTH. FABLE I. Deïanira , the daughter of Œneus, having
been wooed by several suitors, her father gives his consent that she
shall marry him who proves to be the bravest of them. Her other suitors,
having given way to Hercules and Acheloüs, they engage in single combat.
Acheloüs, to gain the advantage over his rival, transforms himself into
various shapes, and, at length, into that of a bull. These attempts are
in vain, and Hercules overcomes him, and breaks off one of his horns.
The Naiads, the daughters of Acheloüs, take it up, and fill it with the
variety of fruits which Autumn affords; on which it obtains the name of
the Horn of Plenty. Theseus, the Neptunian hero, 1 inquires what is the cause of his
sighing, and of his forehead being mutilated; when thus begins the
Calydonian river, having his unadorned hair crowned with reeds: “A mournful task thou art exacting; for who, when overcome, is
desirous to relate his own battles? yet I will relate them in order; nor
was it so disgraceful to be overcome, as it is glorious to have engaged;
and a conqueror so mighty affords me a great consolation. If, perchance,
Deïanira, 2 by her name, has at last reached thy ears, once she was
a most beautiful maiden, and the envied hope of many a wooer; together
with these, when the house of him, whom I desired as my father-in-law,
was entered by me, I said, ‘Receive me, O son of Parthaon, 3 for
thy son-in-law.’ Alcides, too, said the same ; the others yielded
to us two. He alleged that he was offering to the 301 ix. 14-39. damsel both Jupiter as a father-in-law, and the glory of his
labours; the orders, too, of his step-mother, successfully executed. On
the other hand (I thought it disgraceful for a God to give way to a
mortal, for then he was not a God), I said, ‘Thou beholdest me,
a king of the waters, flowing amid thy realms, 4 with my winding course;
nor am I some stranger sent thee for a son-in-law, from foreign
lands, but I shall be one of thy people, and a part of thy state. Only
let it not be to my prejudice, that the royal Juno does not hate me, and
that all punishment, by labours enjoined, is afar from me. For, since
thou, Hercules , dost boast thyself born of Alcmena for thy
mother; Jupiter is either thy pretended sire, or thy real one through a
criminal deed: by the adultery of thy mother art thou claiming a father.
Choose, then , whether thou wouldst rather have Jupiter for
thy pretended father , or that thou art sprung from him through a disgraceful deed?’ “While I was saying such things as these, for some time he looked at
me with a scowling eye, and did not very successfully check his inflamed
wrath; and he returned me just as many words as these : ‘My right
hand is better than my tongue. If only I do but prevail in fighting, do
thou get the better in talking;’ and then he fiercely attacked me. I was ashamed, after having so lately spoken
big words, to yield. I threw on one side my green garment from off
my body, and opposed my arms to his , and I held my hands bent
inwards, 5 from before my breast, on their guard, and I prepared
my limbs for the combat. He sprinkled me with dust, taken up in the
hollow of his hands, and, in his turn, grew yellow with the casting of
yellow sand 6 upon himself . And at one moment he aimed at my
neck, at another my legs, as they shifted about, or you would suppose he
was aiming at them ; and he assaulted me on every side. My bulk
defended me, and I was attacked in vain; no 302 ix. 39-71. otherwise than a mole, which the waves beat against with loud noise: it
remains unshaken , and by its own weight is secure. “We retire a little, and then again we rush together in
conflict, and we stand firm, determined not to yield; foot, too, is
joined to foot; and then I, bending forward full with my breast,
press upon his fingers with my fingers, and his forehead with my
forehead. In no different manner have I beheld the strong bulls engage,
when the most beauteous mate 7 in all the pasture is sought as the
reward of the combat; the herds look on and tremble, uncertain which the
mastery of so great a domain awaits. Thrice without effect did Alcides
attempt to hurl away from him my breast, as it bore hard against him;
the fourth time, he shook off my hold, and loosened my arms clasped
around him; and, striking me with his hand, (I am resolved to
confess the truth) he turned me quite round, and clung, a mighty
load, to my back. If any credit is to be given me , (and, indeed,
no glory is sought by me through an untrue narration) I seemed to
myself as though weighed down with a mountain placed upon me.
Yet, with great difficulty, I disengaged my arms streaming with
much perspiration, and , with great exertion, I unlocked his
firm grasp from my body. He pressed on me as I panted for breath, and
prevented me from recovering my strength, and then seized hold of
my neck. Then, at last, was the earth pressed by my knee, and with my
mouth I bit the sand. Inferior in strength, I had recourse to my
arts, 8 and transformed into a long serpent, I escaped
from the hero. “After I had twisted my body into winding folds, and darted my forked
tongue with dreadful hissings, the Tirynthian laughed, and deriding my
arts, he said, ‘It was the labour of my cradle to conquer serpents; 9 and
although, Acheloüs, thou shouldst excel other snakes, how large a part
wilt thou, but one serpent, be of the Lernæan Echidna? By her very wounds was she multiplied, and not one head of her hundred
in 303 ix. 71-100. number 10 was cut off by me without danger to
myself ; but rather so that her neck became stronger, with two
successors to the former head . Yet her I subdued,
branching with serpents springing from each wound, and growing
stronger by her disasters; and, so subdued, I slew her. What
canst thou think will become of thee, who, changed into a fictitious
serpent, art wielding arms that belong to another, and whom a form,
obtained as a favour, is now disguising?’ Thus he spoke;
and he planted the grip of his fingers on the upper part of my neck.
I was tortured, just as though my throat was squeezed with pincers;
and I struggled hard to disengage my jaws from his fingers. “Thus vanquished, too, there still remained for me my third form, that of a furious bull; with my limbs changed into those
of a bull I renewed the fight. He threw his arms over my brawny
neck, on the left side, and, dragging at me , followed me in my
onward course; and seizing my horns, he fastened them in the hard
ground, and felled me upon the deep sand. And that was not enough; while
his relentless right hand was holding my stubborn horn, he broke it, and
tore it away from my mutilated forehead. This, heaped with fruit and
odoriferous flowers, the Naiads have consecrated, and the bounteous Goddess , Plenty, is enriched by my horn.” Thus he said;
but a Nymph, girt up after the manner of Diana, one of his handmaids,
with her hair hanging loose on either side, came in, and brought the
whole of the produce of Autumn in the most plentiful horn, and
choice fruit for a second course. Day comes on, and the rising sun striking the tops of the hills, the
young men depart; nor do they stay till the stream has quiet restored
to it , and a smooth course, and till the troubled waters
subside. Acheloüs conceals his rustic features, and his mutilated horn,
in the midst of the waves; yet the loss of this honour, taken from him, alone affects him; in other respects, he is unhurt. The injury,
too, which has befallen his head, is now concealed with willow
branches, or with reeds placed upon it. 304 EXPLANATION. The river Acheloüs, which ran between Acarnania and Ætolia, often did
considerable damage to those countries by its inundations, and, at the
same time, by confounding or sweeping away the limits which separated
those nations, it engaged them in continual warfare with each other.
Hercules, who seems really to have been a person of great scientific
skill, which he was ever ready to employ for the service of his fellow
men, raised banks to it, and made its course so uniform and straight,
that he was the means of establishing perpetual peace between these
adjoining nations. The early authors who recorded these events have narrated them under a
thick and almost impenetrable veil of fiction. They say that Hercules
engaged in combat with the God of that river, who immediately
transformed himself into a serpent, by which was probably meant merely
the serpentine windings of its course. Next they say, that the God
changed himself into a bull, under which allegorical form they refer to
the rapid and impetuous overflowing of its banks, ever rushing onwards,
bearing down everything in its course, and leaving traces of its ravages
throughout the country in its vicinity. This mode of description the
more readily occurred to them in the case of Acheloüs, as from the
roaring noise which they often make in their course, rivers in general
were frequently represented under the figure of a bull, and, of course,
as wearing horns, the great instruments of the havoc which they
created. It was said, then, that Hercules at length overcame this bull, and broke
off one of his horns; by which was meant, according to Strabo, that he
brought both the branches of the river into one channel. Again, this
horn became the Horn of Plenty in that region; or, in other words, being
withdrawn from its bed, the river left a large track of very fertile
ground for agricultural purposes. As to the Cornucopia, or Horn of
Plenty of the heathen Mythology, there is some variation in the accounts
respecting it. Some writers say that by it was meant the horn of the
goat Amalthea, which suckled Jupiter, and that the Nymphs gave it to
Acheloüs, who again gave it in exchange for that of which Hercules
afterwards deprived him. Deïanira, having given her hand to Hercules, as
the recompense of the important services which he had rendered to her
father, Œneus, it was fabled that she had been promised to Acheloüs, who
was vanquished by his rival; and on this foundation was built the
superstructure of the famous combat which the Poet here describes. After
having remained for some time at the court of his father-in-law,
Hercules was obliged to leave it, in consequence of having killed the
son of Architritilus, who was the cupbearer of that prince. 305 ix. 101-115. FABLE II. Hercules , returning with Deïanira, as
the prize of his victory, entrusts her to the Centaur Nessus, to carry
her over the river Evenus. Nessus seizes the opportunity of Hercules
being on the other side of the river, and attempts to carry her off; on
which Hercules, perceiving his design, shoots him with an arrow, and
thus prevents its execution. The Centaur, when expiring, in order to
gratify his revenge, gives Deïanira his tunic dipped in his blood,
assuring her that it contains an effectual charm against all infidelity
on the part of her husband. Afterwards, on hearing that Hercules is in
love with Iole, Deïanira sends him the tunic, that it may have the
supposed effect. As soon as he puts it on, he is affected with
excruciating torments, and is seized with such violent fits of madness,
that he throws Lychas, the bearer of the garment, into the sea, where he
is changed into a rock. Hercules, then, in obedience to a response of
the oracle, which he consults, prepares a funeral pile, and laying
himself upon it, his friend Philoctetes applies the torch to it, on
which the hero, having first recounted his labours, expires in the
flames. After his body is consumed, Jupiter translates him to the
heavens, and he is placed in the number of the Gods. But a passion for this same maiden proved fatal to thee, fierce
Nessus, 11 pierced through the back with a swift arrow. For the
son of Jupiter, as he was returning to his native city with his new-made
wife, had now come to the rapid waters of the river Evenus. 12 The stream was swollen to a greater extent than usual
with the winter rains, and was full of whirlpools, and impassable.
Nessus came up to him, regardless of himself, but feeling anxiety
for his wife, both strong of limb, 13 and well acquainted with the fords,
and said, “Alcides, she shall be landed on yonder bank through my
services, do thou employ thy strength in swimming;” and the Aonian hero entrusted to Nessus the Calydonian damsel full of alarm, and
pale with apprehension, and equally dreading both the river and Nessus himself. Immediately, just as he was, loaded both with his
quiver and the spoil of the lion, (for he had thrown his club and his
crooked bow to the opposite side), he said, “Since I have undertaken it,
the stream must be passed.” 306 ix. 118-142. And he does not hesitate; nor does he seek out where the stream is
the smoothest, and he spurns to be borne over by the compliance of the
river. And now having reached the bank, and as he is taking up the bow
which he had thrown over, he recognizes the voice of his wife; and as
Nessus is preparing to rob him of what he has entrusted to his care, he
cries out, “Whither, thou ravisher, does thy vain confidence in thy feet
hurry thee? to thee am I speaking, Nessus, thou two-shaped monster . Listen; and do not carry off my property. If no regard
for myself influences thee, still the wheel of thy father 14 might
have restrained thee from forbidden embraces. Thou shall not escape,
however, although thou dost confide 15 in thy powers of a horse; with a
wound, and not with my feet, will I overtake thee.” These last words he confirms by deeds, and pierces him through the back, as he
is flying, with an arrow discharged at him . The barbed steel
stands out from his breast; soon as it is wrenched out, the blood gushes
forth from both wounds, mingled with the venom of the Lernæan poison.
Nessus takes it out, and says to himself, “And yet I shall not die
unrevenged;” and gives his garment, dyed in the warm blood, as a present
to her whom he is carrying off, as though an incentive to love. Long was the space of intervening time, and the feats of the mighty
Hercules and the hatred of his step-mother had filled the earth. Returning victorious from Œchalia, he is preparing a sacrifice
which he had vowed to Cenæan Jupiter, 16 when tattling Rumour (who takes
pleasure in adding false things to the truth, and from a very little beginning , swells to a great bulk by her lies) runs before to thy
ears, Deïanira, to the effect that the son of Amphitryon is
seized with a passion for Iole. As she loves him, she believes it; and
being alarmed with the report of this new amour, at first she indulges
in 307 ix. 142-175. tears and in her misery gives vent to her grief in weeping. Soon,
however, she says, “But why do I weep? My rival will be delighted with
these tears; and since she is coming I must make haste, and some
contrivance must be resolved on while it is still possible, and
while, as yet, another has not taken possession of my bed. Shall I
complain, or shall I be silent? Shall I return to Calydon, or shall I
stay here? Shall I depart from this abode? or, if nothing more, shall I
oppose their entrance ? What if, O Meleager, remembering that
I am thy sister, I resolve on a desperate deed, and testify, by
murdering my rival, how much, injury and a woman’s grief can
effect?” Her mind wavers, amid various resolves. Before them all, she prefers
to send the garment dyed in the blood of Nessus, to restore strength to
his declining love. Not knowing herself what she is giving, she delivers the cause of her own sorrows to the unsuspecting Lichas, 17 and
bids him, in gentle words, to deliver this most fatal gift to her
husband. In his ignorance, the hero receives it, and places upon his
shoulders the venom of the Lernæan Echidna. He is placing frankincense
on the rising flames, and is offering the words of prayer, and
pouring wine from the bowl upon the marble altars. The virulence of the
bane waxes warm, and, melted by the flames, it runs, widely diffused
over the limbs of Hercules. So long as he is able, he suppresses his
groans with his wonted fortitude. After his endurance is overcome by his
anguish, he pushes down the altars, and fills the woody Œta with his
cries. There is no further delay; he attempts to tear off the
deadly garment; but where it is torn off, it tears away the skin,
and, shocking to relate, it either sticks to his limbs, being tried in
vain to be pulled off, or it lays bare his mangled limbs, and his huge
bones. The blood itself hisses, just as when a red hot plate of metal
is dipped in cold water; and it boils with the burning poison. There
is no limit to his misery ; the devouring flames prey upon his
entrails, and a livid perspiration flows from his whole body; his
half-burnt sinews also crack; and his marrow being now dissolved
by the subtle poison, lifting his hands towards the stars of
heaven , 308 ix. 176-198. he exclaims, “Daughter of Saturn, satiate thyself with my anguish;
satiate thyself, and look down from on high, O cruel Goddess , at this my destruction, and glut thy relentless
heart. Or, if I am to be pitied even by an enemy (for an enemy I am to
thee), take away a life insupportable through these dreadful agonies,
hateful, too, to myself , and only destined to trouble.
Death will be a gain to me. It becomes a stepmother to grant such a
favour. “And was it for this that I subdued Busiris, who polluted the temples of the Gods with the blood of strangers? And did I for
this , withdraw from the savage Antæus 18 the support given him
by his mother? Did neither the triple shape of the Iberian shepherd 19 ,
nor thy triple form, O Cerberus, alarm me? And did you, my hands,
seize the horns of the mighty bull? Does Elis, too , possess the result of your labours, and the Stymphalian waters, and the
Parthenian 20 grove as well ? By your valour was it that the
belt, inlaid with the gold of Thermodon 21 , was gained, the apples too,
guarded in vain by the wakeful dragon? And could neither the Centaurs
resist me, nor yet the boar, the ravager of Arcadia? And was it not of
no avail to the Hydra to grow through its own loss, and to
recover double strength? And what besides? When I beheld the Thracian
steeds fattened with human blood, and the mangers filled with mangled
bodies, did I throw them down when thus beheld, and slay both the
master and the horses themselves? And does the carcass of
the Nemean lion lie crushed by these arms? With this neck did I
support the heavens? 22 309 ix. 198-227. The unrelenting wife of Jupiter 23 was weary of commanding, but I was still unwearied with doing. But now a new calamity
is come upon me, to which resistance can be made neither by valour, nor
by weapons, nor by arms. A consuming flame is pervading the inmost
recesses of my lungs, and is preying on all my limbs. But Eurystheus still survives. And are there,” says he, “any who can believe
that the Deities exist?” And then , racked with pain, he ranges along the lofty Œta, no
otherwise than if a tiger should chance to carry the hunting spears
fixed in his body, and the perpetrator of the deed should be taking to
flight. Often might you have beheld him uttering groans, often shrieking
aloud, often striving to tear away the whole of his garments, and
levelling trees, and venting his fury against mountains, or stretching
out his arms towards the heaven of his father. Lo! he espies Lichas,
trembling and lying concealed in a hollow rock, and, as his pain has
summoned together all his fury, he says, “Didst thou, Lichas, bring this fatal present; and shalt thou be the cause of my death?” He
trembles, and turning pale, is alarmed, and timorously utters
some words of excuse. As he is speaking, and endeavouring to clasp his
knees with his hands, Alcides seizes hold of him, and whirling him round
three or four times, he hurls him into the Eubœan waves, with greater
force than if sent from an engine of war. As he soars aloft in
the aerial breeze he grows hard; and as they say that showers freeze
with the cold winds, and that thence snow is formed, and that
from the snow, revolving in its descent , the soft body is
compressed, and is then made round in many a hailstone, 24 so have
former ages declared, that, hurled through the air by the strong arms of Hercules , and bereft of blood through fear, and having no
moisture left in him, he was transformed into hard stone. Even to this
day, in the Eubœan sea, a small rock projects to a height, and 310 ix. 227-257. retains the traces of the human form. This, the sailors are afraid to
tread upon, as though it could feel it; and they call it Lichas. But thou, the famous offspring of Jupiter, having cut down, trees
which lofty Œta bore, and having raised them for a pile, dost order the
son of Pœas 25 to take the bow and the capacious quiver, and the
arrows which are again to visit 26 the Trojan realms; by whose
assistance flames are put beneath the pile; and while the structure is
being seized by the devouring fires, thou dost cover the summit of the
heap of wood with the skin of the Nemean lion , and dost lie down
with thy neck resting on thy club, with no other countenance than if
thou art lying as a guest crowned with garlands, amid the full cups of
wine. And now, the flames, prevailing and spreading on every side,
roared, 27 and reached the limbs thus undismayed, and him
who despised them. The Gods were alarmed for this protector of
the earth; 28 Saturnian Jupiter (for he perceived it) thus
addressed them with joyful voice: “This fear of yours is my own delight,
O ye Gods of heaven, and, with all my heart, I gladly
congratulate myself that I am called the governor and the father of a
grateful people, and that my progeny, too, is secure in your esteem.
For, although this concern is given in return for his
mighty exploits, still I myself am obliged by it. But,
however, that your affectionate breasts may not be alarmed with vain
fears, despise these flames of Œta. He who has conquered all things,
shall conquer the fires which you behold; nor shall he be sensible of
the potency of the flame, but in the part of him which he derived
from his mother. That part of him , which he derived from me, is
immortal, and exempt and secure from death, and to be subdued by no
flames. This, too, when disengaged from earth, I will receive into
the celestial regions, and I trust that this act of mine will be
agreeable to all the Deities. Yet if any one, if any one, I say , perchance should 311 ix. 257-272. grieve at Hercules being a Divinity, and should be unwilling that
this honour should be conferred on him; still he shall know that he
deserves it to be bestowed on him , and even against his
will, shall approve of it.” To this the Gods assented; his royal spouse, too, seemed to
bear the rest of his remarks with no discontented air , but
only the last words with a countenance of discontent, and to take it
amiss that she was so plainly pointed at. In the mean time,
whatever was liable to be destroyed by flame, Mulciber consumed; and the
figure of Hercules remained, not to be recognized; nor did he have
anything derived from the form of his mother, and he only retained the
traces of immortal Jupiter. And as when a serpent revived, by
throwing off old age with his slough, is wont to be instinct with fresh
life, and to glisten in his new-made scales; so, when the Tirynthian hero has put off his mortal limbs, he flourishes in his more
æthereal part, and begins to appear more majestic, and to become
venerable in his august dignity. Him the omnipotent Father, taking up
among encircling clouds, bears aloft amid the glittering stars, in his
chariot drawn by its four steeds. EXPLANATION. Hercules, leaving the court of Calydon with his wife, proceeded on the
road to the city of Trachyn, in Thessaly, to atone for the accidental
death of Eunomus, and to be absolved from it by Ceyx, who was the king
of that territory. Being obliged to cross the river Evenus, which had
overflowed its banks, the adventure happened with the Centaur Nessus,
which the Poet has here related. We learn from other writers, that after
Nessus had expired, he was buried on Mount Taphiusa; and Strabo informs
us, that his tomb (in which, probably, the ashes of other Centaurs were
deposited) sent forth so offensive a smell, that the Locrians, who were
the inhabitants of the adjacent country, were surnamed the ‘Ozolæ,’ that
is, the ‘ill-smelling,’ or ‘stinking,’ Locrians. Although the river
Evenus lay in the road between Calydon and Trachyn, still it did not run
through the middle of the latter city, as some authors have supposed;
for in such case Hercules would have been more likely to have passed it
by the aid of a bridge or of a boat, than to have recourse to the
assistance of the Centaur Nessus, and to have availed himself of his
acquaintance with the fords of the stream. Hercules, in lapse of time, becoming tired of Deïanira, by whom he had
one son, named Hyllus, fell in love with Iole, the daughter of Eurytus;
and that prince, refusing to give her to him, he made war upon Œchalia,
and, having slain Eurytus, he bore off his daughter. Upon his return
from that expedition, he sent Lychas for the vestments which he had
occasion to use in a sacrifice which it was his intention to offer.
Deïanira, jealous on account 312 ix. 273-274. of his passion for Iole, sent him either a philtre or love potion, which
unintentionally caused his death, or else a tunic smeared on the inside
with a certain kind of pitch, found near Babylon, which, when thoroughly
warmed, stuck fast to his skin; and this it is, most probably, which has
been termed by poets and historians, the tunic of Nessus. It seems,
however, pretty clear that Hercules fell into a languishing distemper,
without any hopes of recovery, and, probably, in a fit of madness, he
threw Lychas into the sea, which circumstance was made by the poets to
account for the existence there of a rock known by that name. Proceeding afterwards to Trachyn, he caused Deiänira to hang herself in
despair; and, having consulted the oracle concerning his distemper, he
was ordered to go with his friends to Mount Œta, and there to raise a
funeral pile. He understood the fatal answer, and immediately prepared
to execute its commands. When the pile was ready, Hercules ascended it,
and laid himself down with an air of resignation, on which Philoctetes
kindled the fire, which consumed him. Some, however, of the ancient
authors say, with more probability, that Hercules died at Trachyn, and
that his corpse was burned on Mount Œta. His apotheosis commenced at the
ceremonial of his funeral, and, from the moment of his death, he was
worshipped as a Demigod. Diodorus Siculus says that it was Iolus who
first introduced this worship. It was also said that, as soon as
Philoctetes had applied fire to the pile, it thundered, and the
lightnings descending from heaven immediately consumed Hercules.
A tomb was raised for him on Mount Œta, with an altar, upon which a
bull, a wild boar, and a he-goat were yearly sacrificed in his
honour, at the time of his festival. The Thebans, and, after them, the
other people of Greece, soon followed the example of the Trachinians,
and temples and altars were raised to him in various places, where he
was honoured as a Demigod. FABLE III. Juno , to be revenged on Alcmena for her
amour with Jupiter, desires Ilithyïa, the Goddess who presides over
births, not to assist her on the occasion of the birth of Hercules.
Lucina complies with her request, and places herself on an altar at the
gate of Alcmena’s abode, where, by a magic spell, she increases her
pains and impedes her delivery. Galanthis, one of her maids, seeing the
Goddess at the door, imagines that she may possibly exercise some bad
influence on her mistress’s labour, and, to make her retire, declares
that Alcmena is already delivered. Upon Ilithyïa withdrawing, Alcmena’s
pains are assuaged, and Hercules is born. The Goddess, to punish
Galanthis for her officiousness, transforms her into a weazel,
a creature which was supposed to bring forth its young through its
mouth. Atlas was sensible 29 of this burden. Nor, as yet, had Eurystheus,
the son of Sthenelus, laid aside his wrath against Hercules ; 313 ix. 274-301. and, in his fury, he vented his hatred for the father against his
offspring. But the Argive Alcmena, disquieted with prolonged anxieties for her son has Iole, to whom to disclose the complaints of her
old age, to whom to relate the achievements of her son attested by all the world, or to whom to tell her own misfortunes. At
the command of Hercules, Hyllus had received her both into his bed and
his affections, and had filled her womb with a noble offspring. To her,
thus Alcmena began her story :— “May the Gods be propitious to thee at least; and may they shorten
the tedious hours, at the hour when, having accomplished thy time, thou
shalt be invoking Ilithyïa, 30 who presides over the trembling
parturient women; her whom the influence of Juno rendered inexorable to
myself. For, when now the natal hour of Hercules, destined for so many
toils, was at hand, and the tenth sign of the Zodiac was laden
with the great luminary, the heavy weight was extending my womb;
and that which I bore was so great, that you might easily pronounce Jupiter to be the father of the concealed burden. And now I
was no longer able to endure my labours: even now, too, as I am
speaking, a cold shudder seizes my limbs, and a part of my pain is
the remembrance of it. Tormented for seven nights, and during as many
days, tired out with misery, and extending my arms towards heaven, with
loud cries I used to invoke Lucina and the two Nixi. 31 She came,
indeed, but corrupted beforehand, and she had the intention to give my
life to the vengeful Juno. And when she heard my groans, she seated
herself upon that altar before the door, and pressing her left knee with
her right knee, her fingers being joined together in form of a
comb, 32 she retarded my delivery; she uttered charms, 314 ix. 301-323. too, in a low voice; and those charms impeded the birth now begun. I struggled hard, and, in my frenzy,
I vainly uttered reproaches against the ungrateful Jupiter, and I
desired to die, and complained in words that would have moved even the hard stones. The Cadmeian matrons attended me, and
offered up vows, and encouraged me in my pains. “There was present one of my hand-maids of the lower class of people,
Galanthis by name , with yellow hair, and active in the
execution of my orders; one beloved for her good services. She perceived
that something unusual 33 was being done by the resentful Juno; and,
while she was often going in and out of the door, she saw the Goddess,
sitting upon the altar, and supporting her arms upon her knees, linked
by the fingers; and then she said, ‘Whoever thou art,
congratulate my mistress; the Argive Alcmena is delivered, and, having
brought forth, she has gained her wishes.’ The Goddess who presides 34 over pregnancy leaped up, and, struck with surprise, loosened her joined
hands. I, myself, on the loosening of those bonds, was delivered. The
story is, that Galanthis laughed, upon deceiving the Divinity. The cruel
Goddess dragged her along thus laughing and seized by her very
hair, and she hindered her as she attempted to raise her body from the
earth, and changed her arms into fore feet. “Her former activity still remains, and her back has not lost
its colour; but her shape is different from her former one.
Because she had assisted me in labour by a lying mouth, she brings forth
from the mouth, 35 and, just as before, she frequents my house.” 315 EXPLANATION. According to Diodorus Siculus and Apollodorus, Amphitryon was the son of
Alceus, the son of Perseus, and his wife, Alcmena, was the daughter of
Electryon, also the son of Perseus; and thus they were cousins. When
their marriage was about to take place, an unforeseen accident prevented
it. Electryon, who was king of Mycenæ, being obliged to revenge the
death of his children, whom the sons of Taphius, king of the Teleboans,
had killed in combat, returned victorious, and brought back with him his
flocks, which he had recovered from Taphius. Amphitryon, who went to
meet his uncle, to congratulate him upon the success of his expedition,
throwing his club at a cow, which happened to stray from the herd,
unfortunately killed him. This accidental homicide lost him the kingdom
of Mycenæ, which was to have formed the dower of Alcmena. Sthenelus, the
brother of Electryon, taking advantage of the public indignation, which
was the result of the accident, drove Amphitryon out of the country of
Argos, and made himself master of his brother’s dominions, which he
left, at his death, to his son Eurystheus, the inveterate persecutor of
Hercules. Amphitryon, obliged to retire to Thebes, was there absolved by Creon;
but when, as he thought, he was about to receive the hand of Alcmena,
who accompanied him to the court of that prince, she declared that, not
being satisfied with the revenge which her father had taken on the
Teleboans, she would consent to be the prize of him who would undertake
to declare war against them. Amphitryon accepted these conditions, and,
forming an alliance with Creon, Cephalus, and some other princes, made a
descent upon the islands which the enemy possessed, and, making himself
master of them, bestowed one of them on his ally, Cephalus. It was during this war that Hercules came into the world; and whether
Amphitryon had secretly consummated his marriage before his departure,
or whether he had returned privately to Thebes, or to Tirynthus, where
Hercules was said to have been born, it was published, that Jupiter, to
deceive Alcmena, had taken the form of her husband, and was the father
of the infant Hercules. If this is not the true explanation of the
story, it may have been invented to conceal some intrigue in which
Alcmena was detected; or, in process of time, to account for the
extraordinary strength and valour of Hercules, it may have been said
that Jupiter, and not Amphitryon, was the father of Hercules. Indeed, we
find Seneca, in one of his Tragedies, putting these words into the mouth
of Hercules:— ‘Whether all that has been said upon this subject be
held as undoubted truth, or whether it proves to be but a fable, and
that my father was, after all, in reality, but a mortal; my mother’s
fault is sufficiently effaced by my valour, and I have merit sufficient
to have had Jupiter for my father.’ The more readily, perhaps, to
account for the transcendent strength and prowess of Hercules, the story
was invented, that Jupiter made the night on which he was received by
Alcmena under the form of Amphitryon, as long as three, or, according to
Plautus, Hyginus, and Seneca, nine nights. Some writers say that Alcmena
brought forth twins, one of which, Iphiclus, was the son of Amphitryon,
while Hercules had Jupiter for his father. 316 With respect to the metamorphosis of Galanthis, it is but a little
episode here introduced by Ovid, to give greater plausibility to the
other part of the story. It most probably originated in the resemblance
of the names of that slave to that of the weazel, which the Greeks
called γαλῆ . Ælian, indeed,
tells us that the Thebans paid honour to that animal, because it had
helped Alcmena in her labour. The more ancient poets also added, that
Juno retarded the birth of Hercules till the mother of Eurystheus was
delivered, which was the cause of his being the subject of that king;
though others state that this came to pass by the command of the oracle
of Delphi. This king of Mycenæ having ordered him to rid Greece of the
numerous robbers and wild beasts that infested it, it is most probable
that, as we learn from Dionysius of Halicarnassus, he performed this
service at the head of the troops of Eurystheus. If this is the case,
the persecutions which the poets have ascribed to the jealousy of Juno,
really originated either in the policy or the jealousy of the court of
Mycenæ. As Ovid has here cursorily taken notice of the labours of Hercules, we
may observe, that it is very probable that his history is embellished
with the pretended adventures of many persons who bore his name, and,
perhaps, with those of others besides. Cicero, in his ‘Treatise on the
Nature of the Gods,’ mentions six persons who bore the name of Hercules;
and possibly, after a minute examination, a much greater number
might be reckoned, many nations of antiquity having given the name to
such great men of their own as had rendered themselves famous by their
actions. Thus, we find one in Egypt in the time of Osiris, in Phœnicia,
among the Gauls, in Spain, and in other countries. Confining ourselves
to the Grecian Hercules, surnamed Alcides, we find that his exploits
have generally been sung of by the poets, under the name of the Twelve
Labours; but, on entering into the detail of them, we find them much
more numerous. Killing some serpents in his youth, it was published, not
only that he had done so, but that they had been sent by Juno for the
purpose of destroying him. The forest of Nemea serving as a retreat for
a great number of lions that ravaged the country, Hercules hunted them,
and, killing the most furious of them, always wore his skin. Several thieves, having made the neighbourhood of Lake Stymphalus, in
Arcadia, their resort, he freed the country of them; the nails and wings
which the poets gave them, in representing them as birds, being typical
of their voracity and activity. The marshes of Lerna, near Argos, were
infested by great numbers of serpents, which, as fast as they were
destroyed, were replaced by new swarms; draining the marshes, and,
probably, setting fire to the adjacent thickets or jungles, he destroyed
these pestilent reptiles, on which it was fabled that he had destroyed
the Hydra of Lerna, with its heads, which grew as fast as they were cut
off. The forest of Erymanthus was full of wild boars, which laid waste
all the neighbouring country: he destroyed them all, and brought one
with him to the court of Eurystheus, of a size so monstrous, that the
king was alarmed on seeing it, and was obliged to run and hide
himself. The stables of Augeas, king of Elis, were so filled with manure, by
reason of the great quantity of oxen that he kept, that Hercules being 317 called upon to cleanse them, employed his engineering skill in bringing
the river Alpheus through them. Having pursued a hind for a whole year,
which Eurystheus had commanded him to take, it was circulated, probably
on account of her untiring swiftness, that she had feet of brass. The
river Acheloüs having overflowed the adjacent country, he raised banks
to it, as already mentioned. Theseus was a prisoner in Epirus, where he
had been with Pirithous, to bring away the daughter of Aidoneus.
Hercules delivered him; and that was the foundation of the Fable which
said that he had gone down to Hades, or Hell. In the cavern of Tænarus
there was a monstrous serpent; this he was ordered to kill, and,
probably, this gave rise to the story of Cerberus being chained by him.
Pelias having been killed by his daughters, his son Acastus pursued them
to the court of Admetus, who, refusing to deliver up Alcestis, of whom
he was enamoured, was taken prisoner in an engagement, and was delivered
by that princess, who herself offered to be his ransom. Hercules being
then in Thessaly, he took her away from Acastus, who was about to put
her to death, and returned her to Admetus. This, probably, was the
foundation of the fable which stated, that he had recovered her from the
Infernal Regions, after having vanquished death, and bound him in
chains. The Amazons were a nation of great celebrity in the time of Hercules,
and their frequent victories had rendered them very formidable to their
neighbours. Eurystheus ordered him to go and bring away the girdle of
Hippolyta, or, in other words, to make war upon them, and to pillage
their treasures. Embarking on the Euxine Sea, Hercules arrived on the
banks of the Thermodon, and, giving battle to the female warriors,
defeated them; killing some, and putting the rest to flight. He took
Antiope, or Hippolyta, prisoner, whom he gave to Theseus; but her
sister, Menalippa, redeemed herself by giving up the famous girdle, or,
in other words, by paying a large ransom. It is very probable, that in
that expedition, he slew Diomedes, the barbarous king of Thrace, and
brought away his mares, which were said to have been fed by him on human
flesh. In returning by way of Thessaly, he embarked in the expedition of
the Argonauts; but, leaving them soon afterwards, he went to Troy, and
delivered Hesione from the monster which was to have devoured her; but
not receiving from Laomedon, the king, the recompense which had been
promised him, he killed that prince, sacked the city, and brought away
Hesione, whom he gave to Telamon, who had accompanied him on the
expedition. This is probably the extent of the labours of Hercules in Greece,
Thrace, and Phrygia. The poets have made him engage in many other
laborious undertakings in distant countries, which most probably ought
not to be attributed to the Grecian Hercules. Among other stories told
of him, it is said, that having set out to fight with Geryon, the king
of Spain, he was so much incommoded by the heat of the sun, that his
wrath was excited against the luminary, and he fired his arrows at it,
on which, the Sun, struck with admiration at his spirited conduct, made
him a present of a golden goblet. After this, embarking and arriving in
Spain, he defeated Geryon, a prince who was famed for having three
heads, which probably either meant that he reigned over the three
Balearic islands of Maiorca, Minorca, and Iviza, or else that 318 Hercules defeated three princes who were strictly allied. Having thence
passed the straits of Gibraltar to go over to Africa, he fought with the
Giant Antæus, who sought to oppose his landing. That prince was said to
be a son of the Earth, and was reported to recover fresh strength every
time he was thrown on the ground; consequently, Hercules was obliged to
hold him in his arms, till he had squeezed him to death. The solution of
this fable is most probably that Antæus, always finding succour in a
country where he was known as a powerful monarch, Hercules took measures
to deprive him of aid, by engaging him in a sea fight, and thereby
defeated him, without much trouble, as well as the Pygmies, who were
probably some African tribes of stunted stature, who came to his
assistance. Hercules, returning from these two expeditions, passed through Gaul with
the herds of Geryon, and went into Italy, where Cacus, a celebrated
robber, who had made the caverns of Mount Aventine his haunts, having
stolen some of his oxen, he, with the assistance, according to Dionysius
of Halicarnassus, of Evander and Faunus, destroyed him, and shared his
spoils with his allies. In his journey from Africa, Hercules delivered
Atlas from the enmity of Busiris, the tyrant of Egypt, whom he killed;
and gave such good advice to the Mauritanian king, that it was said that
he supported the heavens for some time on his own shoulders, to relieve
those of Atlas. The latter, by way of acknowledgment of his services,
made him a present of several fine sheep, or rather, according to
Diodorus Siculus, of some orange and lemon trees, which he carried with
him into Greece. These were represented as the golden apples watched by
a dragon in the garden of the Hesperides. As the ocean there terminated
the scene of his conquests, he was said to have raised two pillars on
those shores, to signify the fact of his having been there, and the
impossibility of proceeding any further. The deliverance of Prometheus, as already mentioned; the death of the
two brothers, the Cercopes, famous robbers; the defeat of the Bull of
Marathon; the death of Lygis, who disputed the passage of the Alps with
him; that of the giant Alcyaneus, who hurled at him a stone so vast that
it crushed twenty-four men to death; that of Eryx, king of Sicily, whom
he killed with a blow of the cestus, for refusing to deliver to him the
oxen which he had stolen; the combat with Cycnus, which was terminated
by a peal of thunder, which separated the combatants; another combat
against the Giants in Gaul, during which, as it was said, Jupiter rained
down vast quantities of stones; all these are also attributed to
Hercules, besides many more stories, which, if diligently collected,
would swell to a large volume. The foregoing remarks on the history of Hercules, give us an insight
into the ideas which, based upon the explanations given by the authors
of antiquity, the Abbè Banier, one of the most accomplished scholars of
his age, entertained on this subject. We will conclude with some very
able and instructive remarks on this mythus, which we extract from Mr.
Keightley’s Mythology of Ancient Greece and Italy. He says— “Various theories have been formed respecting the mythus of Hercules. It
is evidently one of very remote antiquity, long perhaps, anterior to the 319 times of Homer. We confess that we cannot see any very valid reason for
supposing no such real personage to have existed; for it will, perhaps,
be found that mythology not unfrequently prefers to absolute fiction,
the assuming of some real historic character, and making it the object
of the marvels devised by lively and exuberant imagination, in order
thereby to obtain more ready credence for the strange events which it
creates. Such, then, may the real Hercules have
been,—a Dorian, a Theban, or an Argive hero, whose feats
of strength lived in the traditions of the people, and whom national
vanity raised to the rank of a son of Zeus [Jupiter], and poetic fancy,
as geographic knowledge extended, sent on journies throughout the known
world, and accumulated in his person the fabled exploits of similar
heroes of other regions. “We may perceive, by the twelve tasks, that the astronomical theory was
applied to the mythus of the hero, and that he was regarded as a
personification of the Sun, which passes through the twelve signs of the
Zodiac. This, probably, took place during the Alexandrian period. Some
resemblance between his attributes and those of the Deity, with whom the
Egyptian priests were pleased to identify him, may have given occasion
to this notion; and he also bore some similitude to the God whom the
Phœnicians chiefly worshipped, and who, it is probable, was the Sun. But
we must steadily bear in mind, that Hercules was a hero in the popular
legend long before any intercourse was opened between Greece and Egypt;
and that, however (which is certainly not very likely) a God might
be introduced from Phœnicia, the same could hardly be the case with a
popular hero.—A very ingenious theory on the mythus of
Hercules is given by Buttmann (Mythologus, vol. i., p. 246). Though
acknowledging that Perseus, Theseus, and Hercules may have been real
persons, he is disposed, from an attentive consideration of all the
circumstances in the mythus of the last, to regard him as one of those
poetical persons or personifications, who, as he says, have obtained
such firm footing in the dark periods of antiquity, as to have acquired
the complete air of historic personages. “In his view of the life of Hercules, it is a mythus of extreme
antiquity and great beauty, setting forth the ideal of human perfection,
consecrated to the weal of mankind, or rather, in its original form, to
that of his own nation. This perfection, according to the ideas of the
heroic age, consists in the greatest bodily strength, united with the
advantages of mind and soul recognised by that age. Such a hero is, he
says, a man; but these noble qualities in him are of divine origin.
He is, therefore, the son of the king of the Gods by a mortal mother. To
render his perfection the more manifest, the Poet makes him to have a
twin brother, the child of a mortal sire. As virtue is not to be
learned, Hercules exhibits his strength and courage in infancy; he
strangles the snakes, which fills his brother with terror. The character
of the hero throughout life, as that of the avenger of injustice and
punisher of evil, must exhibit itself in the boy as the wild instinct of
nature; and the mythus makes him kill his tutor Linus with a blow of the
lyre. When sent away by Amphitryon, he prepares himself, in the
stillness and solitude of the shepherd’s life, by feats of strength and
courage, for his future task of purifying the earth of violence. 320 “—The number of tasks may not originally have been twelve, though
most accounts agree in that number, but they were all of a nature
agreeable to the ideas of an heroic age—the destruction of
monsters, and bringing home to his own country the valuable productions
of other regions. These are, however, regarded by Buttmann as being
chiefly allegorical. The Hydra, for instance, he takes to have been
meant to represent the evils of democratic anarchy, with its numerous
heads, against which, though one may not be able to effect anything, yet
the union of even two may suffice to become dominant over it. “The toils of the hero conclude with the greatest and most rare of all
in the heroic age—the conquest over death. This is represented by
his descent into the under world, and dragging Cerberus to light is a
proof of his victory. In the old mythus, he was made to engage with and
wound Hades; and the Alcestis of Euripides exhibits him in conflict with
Death. But virtue, to be a useful example, must occasionally succumb to
human weakness in the power of the evil principle. Hence, Hercules falls
into fits of madness, sent on him by Hera [Juno]; and hence—he
becomes the willing slave of Omphale, the fair queen of Lydia, and
changes his club and lion’s skin for the distaff and the female
robe. “The mythus concludes most nobly with the assumption of the hero into
Olympus. His protecting Deity abandons him to the power of his
persevering enemy; his mortal part is consumed by fire, the fiercest of
elements; his shade ( εἴδωλον ), like those of other men, descends to the
realms of Hades, while the divine portion himself ( αὐτὸς ) mounts from the pyre in a thunder-cloud,
and the object of Hera’s persecution being now accomplished, espouses
youth, the daughter of his reconciled foe. “Muller (Dorians, vol. i. part ii. ch. 11, 12) is also disposed to view
in Hercules a personification of the highest powers of man in the heroic
age. He regards him as having been the national hero of the Dorian race,
and appropriates to him all the exploits of the hero in Thessaly,
Ætolia, and Epirus, which last place he supposes to have been the
original scene of the Geryoneia, which was afterwards transformed to the
western stream of the ocean. He thinks, however, that the Argives had an
ancient hero of perhaps the same name, to whom the Peloponnesus
adventures belong, and whom the Dorians combined with their own hero.
The servitude to Eurystheus, and the enmity of Hera, he looks on as
inventions of the Dorians to justify their own invasion of the
Peloponnesus. This critic also proves that the Theban Hercules had
nothing to do with the Gods and traditions of the Cadmeians; and he
thinks that it was the Dorian Heracleides who introduced the knowledge
of him into Thebes, or that he came from Delphi with the worship of
Apollo, a Deity with whom, as the tutelar God of the Dorians, he
supposes their national hero to have been closely connected.” 321 ix. 324-348. FABLE IV. The Nymph Lotis, pursued by Priapus, in
her flight, is changed into a tree. Dryope, going to sacrifice to the
Naiads at the same spot, and ignorant of the circumstance, breaks a
branch off the tree for her child, which she is carrying with her, and
is subjected to a similar transformation. While Iole is relating these
circumstances to Alcmena, she is surprised to see her brother Iolaüs
restored to youth. The Poet here introduces the prediction of Themis
concerning the children of Calirrhoë. Thus she said; and, moved by the remembrance of her old servant, she
heaved a deep sigh. Her daughter-in-law 36 addressed her, thus grieving.
“Even her form being taken away from one that was an alien to thy blood,
affects thee, O mother. What if I were to relate to thee the
wondrous fate of my own sister? although tears and sorrow hinder me, and
forbid me to speak. Dryope, the most remarkable for her beauty of the
Œchalian maids, was the only daughter of her mother ( for my
father had me by another wife ). Deprived of her virginity, and
having suffered violence from the God that owns Delphi and Delos,
Andræmon married her, and he was esteemed fortunate in his wife. “There is a lake that gives the appearance of a sloping shore, by its
shelving border; groves of myrtle crown the upper part. Hither did
Dryope come, unsuspecting of her fate; and, that thou mayst be the more
indignant at her lot , she was about to offer garlands to the
Nymphs. In her bosom, too, she was bearing her son, who had not yet
completed his first year, a pleasing burden; and she was nursing
him, with the help of her warm milk. Not far from the lake was
blooming a watery lotus that vied with the Tyrian tints, in hope of future berries. Dryope had plucked thence some flowers, which she
might give as playthings to her child; and I, too, was just on the point
of doing the same; for I was present. I saw bloody drops fall from
the flower, and the boughs shake with a tremulous quivering; for, as the
swains say, now, at length, too late in their information , the
Nymph Lotis, flying from the lust of Priapus, 37 had transferred her
changed form into this plant , her name being still preserved. 322 ix. 349-383. “Of this my sister was ignorant. When, in her alarm, she is
endeavouring to retire and to depart, having adored the Nymphs, her feet
are held fast by a root. She strives hard to tear them up, but she moves
nothing except her upper parts. From below, a bark slowly grows up,
and, by degrees, it envelopes the whole of her groin. When she sees
this, endeavouring to tear her hair with her hands, she fills her hand
with leaves, for leaves are covering all her head. But the boy
Amphissos (for his grandfather Eurytus gave him this name) feels his
mother’s breast growing hard; nor does the milky stream follow upon his
sucking. I was a spectator of thy cruel destiny, and I could give
thee no help, my sister; and yet , as long as I could,
I delayed the growing trunk and branches by embracing them; and,
I confess it, I was desirous to be hidden beneath the same
bark. Behold! her husband Andræmon and her most wretched father 38 appear, and inquire for Dryope: on their inquiring for Dryope,
I show them the lotus. They give kisses to the wood still warm with life , and, extended on the ground , they cling to
the roots of their own tree. And now, dear sister, thou hadst
nothing except thy face, that was not tree. Tears drop upon the leaves
made out of thy changed body; and, while she can, and while her
mouth gives passage to her voice, she pours forth such complaints as
these into the air:— “‘If any credit is to be given to the wretched, I swear
by the Deities that I merited not this cruel usage. I suffer
punishment without a crime. I lived in innocence; if I am speaking
false, withered away, may I lose the leaves which I bear, and, cut down
with axes, may I be burnt. Yet take this infant away from the branches
of his mother, and give him to his nurse; and often, beneath my tree,
make him drink milk, and beneath my tree let him play; and, when he
shall be able to speak, make him salute his mother, and let him in
sadness say, ‘Beneath this trunk is my mother concealed.’ Yet let him
dread the ponds, and let him not pluck flowers from the trees; and let
him think that all shrubs are the bodies of Goddesses. Farewell, dear
husband; and thou, sister; and, thou my father; in whom, if there
is any affection towards me , protect my branches from the wounds
of the sharp pruning-knife, 323 ix. 383-410. and from the bite of the cattle. And since it is not allowed me
to bend down towards you, stretch your limbs up hither, and come near
for my kisses, while they can still be reached, and lift up my
little son. More I cannot say. For the soft bark is now creeping along
my white neck, and I am being enveloped at the top of my head. Remove
your hands from my eyes; 39 and , without your help, let the bark,
closing over them, cover my dying eyes.’ Her mouth ceased at once to
speak, at once to exist; and long after her body was changed, were her
newly formed branches still warm.” And now , while Iole was relating the wretched fate of her
sister, and while Alcmena was drying away the tears of the daughter of
Eurytus, with her fingers applied to her face , and still she
herself was weeping, a novel event hushed all their sorrow; for
Iolaüs 40 stood at the lofty threshold, almost a boy again , and covering his cheeks with a down almost imperceptible,
having his visage changed to that of the first years of
manhood . Hebe, the daughter of Juno had granted him this favour,
overcome by the solicitations of her husband. When she was about to
swear that she would hereafter grant such favours to no one, Themis did
not allow her. “For now,” said she, “Thebes is commencing civil
warfare, 41 and Capaneus will not be able to be overcome, except
by Jupiter, and the two brothers will engage in bloody combat, and the
earth dividing, the prophet Amphiaraüs will see his destined shades, while he still lives; 42 and the son avenging
one parent, by the death of the other parent, will be
dutiful and wicked in the same action; and confounded by his
misfortunes, deprived both of his reason and of his home, he will be
persecuted both by the features of the 324 ix. 410-424. Eumenides, and by the ghost of his mother; until his wife shall call
upon him for the fatal gold, and the Phegeïan sword shall stab the side
of their kinsman. Then, at last, shall Calirrhoë, the daughter of
Acheloüs, suppliantly ask of mighty Jupiter these years of youth for her infant sons. Jupiter, concerned for them , will prescribe
for them the peculiar gift of her who is both his
step-daughter and his daughter-in-law, 43 and will make them men in their
years of childhood.” When Themis, foreseeing the future, had said these words with
prophetic voice, the Gods above murmured in varying discourse; and the
complaint was, 44 why it might not be allowed others to grant the same
gifts. Aurora , the daughter of Pallas, complained of the aged
years of her husband; the gentle Ceres complained that Iäsion 45 was
growing grey; Mulciber demanded for Ericthonius a life to live over
again; a concern for the future influenced Venus, too, and she made
an offer to renew the years of Anchises. EXPLANATION. The adventure of Dryope is one of those narratives which have no
connexion with the main story which the Poet is relating, and, if really
founded on fact, it would almost baffle any attempt to guess at its
origin. It is, most probably, built entirely upon the name of the damsel
who was said to have met with the untimely and unnatural fate so well
depicted by the Poet. The name of Dryope comes, very probably, from the Greek word Δρῦς , ‘an oak,’ which tree has a
considerable resemblance to the lotus tree. If we seek for an historical
solution, perhaps Dryope was punished for attempting to profane a tree
consecrated to the Gods, a crime of which Erisicthon was guilty,
and for which he was so signally punished. All the particulars that we
know of Dryope are, that she was the daughter of Eurytus, and the sister
of Iole; and that she was the wife of Andræmon. Ovid says, that while Iole was relating this adventure to Alcmena,
Iolaüs, who, according to some, was the son of Hercules, by Hebe, after
his apotheosis, and, according to others, was the son of Iphiclus, the
brother of Hercules, became young, at the intercession of that Goddess,
who had 325 ix. 425-426. appeased Juno. This was, probably, no other than a method of accounting
for the great age to which and individual of the name of Iolaüs had
lived. Ovid then passes on to the surprising change in the children of
Calirrhoë, the outline of which the story may be thus
explained:—Amphiaraüs, foreseeing, (by the aid of the prophetic
art, as we learn from Homer, Diodorus Siculus, Pliny and Statius), that
the civil wars of Thebes, his native country, would prove fatal to him,
retired from the court of Adrastus, King of Argos, whose sister he had
married, to conceal himself in some place of safety. The Argives, to
whom the oracle had declared, that Thebes could not be taken unless they
had Amphiaraüs with their troops, searched for him in every direction;
but their labour would have been in vain, if Eriphyle, his wife, gained
by a necklace of great value, which her brother Adrastus gave her, had
not discovered where he was. Discovered in his retreat, Amphiaraüs
accompanied the Argives, and while, according to the rules of the
soothsaying art, he was observing a flight of birds, in order to derive
an augury from it, his horses fell down a precipice, and he lost his
life. Statius and other writers, to describe this event in a poetical
manner, say that the earth opened and swallowed up him and his
chariot. Amphiaraüs had engaged his son Alcmæon, in case he lost his life in the
war, to kill Eriphyle; which injunction he performed as soon as he heard
of the death of his father. Alcmæon, going to the court of Phegeus, to
receive expiation for his crime, and to deliver himself from the
persecution of the Furies, or, in other words, by the ceremonial of
expiation, to tranquillize his troubled conscience, that prince received
him with kindness, and gave him his daughter Alphesibæa in marriage.
Alcmæon made her a present of his mother Eriphyle’s necklace; but,
having afterwards repudiated her to marry Calirrhoë, or Arsinoë, the
daughter of Acheloüs, he went to demand the necklace from his
brothers-in-law, who assassinated him. Amphiterus and Acarnanus, who
were his sons by Calirrhoë, revenged the death of their father when they
were very young; and this it is, possibly, which is meant by the Poet
when he says that the Goddess Hebe augmented the number of their years,
the purpose being, to put them speedily in a position to enable them to
avenge the death of their father. Thus we see, that Iolaüs was, like Æson, who also renewed his youth,
a person who, in his old age, gave marks of unusual vigour; while
in Amphiterus and Arcananus, to whom Hebe added years, are depicted two
young men, who, by a deed of blood, exacted retribution for the death of
their father, at a time when they were in general only looked upon as
mere children. FABLE V. Byblis falls in love with her brother
Caunus, and her passion is inflamed to such a degree, that he is obliged
to leave his native country, to avoid any encouragement of her
incestuous flame. On this, she follows him; and, in her way through
Caria, she is changed into a fountain. Every God has 46 some one to favour; and their jarring discord 326 ix. 428-457. is increasing by their various interests, until Jupiter opens his
mouth, and says, “O, if you have any regard for me, to what rash steps
are you proceeding? Does any one of you seem to himself so
powerful as to overcome even the Fates? By the Fates has Iolaüs returned
to those years which he has spent; by the Fates ought the sons of
Calirrhoë to become young men, and not by ambition or by dint of
arms. And do you, too, endure this as well with more contented mind, for even me do the Fates govern; could I but change them,
declining years should not be making my son Æacus to bend beneath them ; and Rhadamanthus should have the everlasting flower
of age, together with my son , Minos, who is now looked
down upon on account of the grievous weight of old age, and does not
reign with the dignity with which once he did .” The words of Jupiter influenced the Divinities; and no one continued
to complain when they saw Rhadamanthus and Æacus, and Minos, weary with
years; Minos , who, when he was in the prime of life, had alarmed
great nations with his very name. Then, however , he was enfeebled
by age, and was alarmed by Miletus, the son of Deione, 47 exulting in
the strength of youth, and in Phœbus as his sire; and though believing that he was aiming at his kingdom, still he did not dare to
drive him away from his native home. Of thy own accord, Miletus, thou
didst fly, and in the swift ship thou didst pass over the Ægean waters,
and in the land of Asia didst build a city, bearing the name of its
founder. Here Cyane, the daughter of the river Mæander, that so
often returns to the same place, while she was following the windings of
her father’s bank, of a body excelling in beauty, being known by thee,
brought forth a double offspring, Byblis, with Caunus, her
brother . Byblis is an example that damsels only ought to love what it
is allowed them to love ; Byblis, seized with a passion for her
brother, the descendant of Apollo, loved him not as a sister loves a brother, nor in such manner as she ought. At first,
indeed, she understands nothing of the flame, and she 327 ix. 457-488. does not think 48 that she is doing wrong in so often giving him
kisses, and in throwing her arms round the neck of her brother;
and for a long time she herself is deceived, by this resemblance
of natural affection. By degrees this affection degenerates, and decked
out, she comes to see her brother, and is too anxious to appear
beautiful; and if there is any woman there more beautiful, she envies
her. But, as yet she is not fully discovered to herself, and under that
flame conceives no wishes; but still, inwardly she is agitated. At one
moment she calls him sweetheart, 49 at another, she hates the mention of
his relationship; and now she prefers that he should call her Byblis,
rather than sister. Still, while awake, she does not dare admit any
criminal hopes into her mind; but when dissolved in soft sleep,
she often sees the object which she is in love with. She seems to
be even embracing her brother, and she blushes, though she is lying
buried in sleep. Slumber departs; for a long time she is silent, and she
recalls to memory the appearance of her dream, and thus she
speaks with wavering mind: “Ah, wretched me! What means this vision of the silent night? How far
am I from wishing it real. Why have I seen this dream? He is, indeed,
beautiful, even to envious eyes. He pleases me, too; and were he not my
brother, I could love him, and he would be worthy of me. But it is
my misfortune that I am his sister. So long as I strive, while awake, to
commit no such attempt , let sleep often return with the like
appearance. No witness is there in sleep; and yet there is the
resemblance of the delight. O Venus and winged Cupid, together with
thy voluptuous mother, how great the joys I experienced! how substantial
the transport which affected me! How I lay dissolved in delight throughout my whole marrow! How pleasing to remember it; although
short-lived was that pleasure, and the night sped onward rapidly, and
was envious of my attempts at bliss . Oh, could I only be united to thee , by changing my name, how happily, Caunus, could I become
the daughter-in-law of thy father! how 328 ix. 488-516. happily, Caunus, couldst thou become the son-in-law of my father! O,
that the Gods would grant that all things were in common with us, except
our ancestors. Would that thou wast more nobly born than myself. For
this reason then, most beauteous one, thou wilt make some stranger, whom
I know not, a mother; but to me, who have unhappily got the same
parents as thyself, thou wilt be nothing more than a brother.
That tie alone we shall have, which bars all else. What, then, do
my visions avail me? And what weight have dreams? And do dreams have any
weight? The Gods fare better; for the Gods have their own sisters in marriage . Thus Saturn married Ops, 50 related to him by
blood; Ocean Tethys, the ruler of Olympus Juno. The Gods above have
their privileges. Why do I attempt to reduce human customs to the rule
of divine ordinances, and those so different? Either this forbidden
flame shall be expelled from my heart, or if I cannot effect that,
I pray that I may first perish, and that when dead I may be laid
out on my bed, and that my brother may give me kisses as I lie. And
besides, this matter requires the inclination of us both; suppose it
pleases me; to him it will seem to be a crime. But the sons of Æolus 51 did not shun the embraces of their sisters. But whence have I known of
these? Why have I furnished myself with these precedents? Whither am I
hurried onward? Far hence begone, ye lawless flames! and let not my
brother be loved by me, but as it is lawful for a sister to love
him . But yet, if he had been first seized with a passion for me,
perhaps I might have indulged his desires. Am I then, myself, to court
him, whom I would not have rejected, had he courted me? And canst thou
speak out? And canst thou confess it? Love will compel me. I can.
Or if shame shall restrain my lips, a private letter shall confess
the latent flame.” This thought pleases her, this determines her wavering 329 ix. 516-546. mind. She raises herself on her side, and leaning on her left elbow, she
says, “He shall see it; let me confess my frantic passion. Ah, wretched
me! How am I degrading myself! What flame is my mind now kindling!” And then , with trembling hand, she puts together the
words well weighed. Her right hand holds the iron pen , the other,
clean wax tablets. 52 She begins, and then she hesitates; she
writes, and then corrects what is written; she marks, and then scratches out; she alters, and condemns, and approves; and
one while she throws them down when taken up, and at another time, she
takes them up again, when thrown aside. What she would have, she knows
not. Whatever she seems on the point of doing, is not to her taste. In
her features are assurance mingled with shame. The word ‘sister’
is written; it seems as well to efface the word ‘sister,’
and then to write such words as these upon the smoothed wax: “Thy
lover wishes thee that health which she, herself, is not to enjoy,
unless thou shalt grant it. I am ashamed! Oh, I am ashamed to
disclose my name! and shouldst thou inquire what it is I wish; without
my name 53 could I wish my cause to be pleaded, and that I might
not be known as Byblis, until the hopes of enjoying my desires
were realized. There might have been as a proof to thee of my wounded
heart, my pale complexion, my falling away, my downcast looks, and my eyes often wet with tears, sighs, too, fetched without any
seeming cause; frequent embraces too, and kisses, which, if perchance
thou didst observe, could not be deemed to be those of a sister. Still
I, myself, though I had a grievous wound in my soul, and although
there was a raging fire within, have done everything, as the Gods are my
witnesses, that at last I might be cured; and long, in my wretchedness,
have I struggled to escape the ruthless weapon of Cupid; and I have
endured more hardships than thou wouldst believe that a maiden could
endure. “Vanquished at length , I am forced to own my passion ;
and with timorous prayers, to entreat thy aid. Thou alone canst 330 ix. 546-579. save, thou destroy, one who loves thee. Choose which thou wilt do. She
is not thy enemy who begs this; but one who, though most nearly
connected with thee, desires to be still more closely connected, and to
be united to thee in a nearer tie. Let aged men be acquainted with
ordinances, and make inquiry what is lawful, and what is wicked, and
what is proper; and let them employ themselves in considering the laws.
A passion that dares all consequences is suited to our years. As
yet, we know not what is lawful, and we believe that all things are
lawful, and so follow the example of the great Gods. Neither a
severe father, nor regard for character, nor fear, shall restrain us, if only the cause for fearing is removed. Under a brother’s name
will we conceal our stolen joys so sweet. I have the liberty
of conversing with thee in private; and even before others do we
give embraces, and exchange kisses. How little is it that is wanting! do
have pity on the love of her who confesses it, and who would not confess
it, did not extreme passion compel her; and merit not to be inscribed on
my tomb as the cause of my death .” The filled tablets fall short for her hand, as it vainly inscribes
such words as these, and the last line is placed in the margin. 54 At
once she seals up her own condemnation, with the impress of a signet,
which she wets with her tears, for the moisture has deserted her
tongue. Filled with shame, she then calls one of her male
domestics, and gently addressing him in timorous tones, she said, “Carry
these, most trusty one, to my,” and, after a long pause, she added,
“brother.” While she was delivering them, the tablets, slipping from her
hands, fell down. She was shocked by this omen, but still she sent them.
The servant, having got a fit opportunity, goes to her brother and delivers the secret writing. The Mæandrian youth, 55 seized with
sudden anger, throws away the tablets so received, when he has
read a part; and, with difficulty withholding his hands from the face of
the trembling servant, he says, “Fly hence, O thou accursed pander
to forbidden lust, who shouldst have given me satisfaction by thy death,
if it was not that thy destruction would bring disgrace on
my character.” Frightened, he hastens 331 ix. 579-609. away, and reports to his mistress the threatening expressions of Caunus.
Thou, Byblis, on hearing of his refusal, turnest pale, and thy breast,
beset with an icy chill, is struck with alarm; yet when thy senses
return, so, too, does thy frantic passion return, and thy tongue with
difficulty utters such words as these, the air being struck by thy
accents : “And deservedly am I thus treated ; for why, in my rashness,
did I make the discovery of this wound? why have I so speedily committed
words to a hasty letter, which ought rather to have been
concealed? The feelings of his mind ought first to have been tried
beforehand by me, with ambiguous expressions. Lest he should not follow
me in my course, I ought, with some part of my sail 56 only ,
to have observed what kind of a breeze it was, and to have scudded over
the sea in safety; whereas , now, I have filled my canvass
with winds before untried. I am driven upon rocks in
consequence; and sunk, I am buried beneath the whole ocean, and my
sails have now no retreat. And besides, was I not forbidden, by
unerring omens, to indulge my passion, at the time when the waxen tablets fell, as I ordered him to deliver them, and made my hopes
sink to the ground? and ought not either the day to have been changed,
or else my whole intentions; but rather, of the two , 57 the day? Some God himself warned me, and gave me unerring signs, if I had
not been deranged; and yet I ought to have spoken out myself, and not to
have committed myself to writing, and personally I ought to
have discovered my passion; then he would have seen my tears, then he would have seen the features of her who loved him;
I might have given utterance to more than what the letter
contained. I might have thrown my arms around his reluctant neck,
and have embraced his feet, and lying on the ground , I might
have begged for life; and if I had been repelled, I might have
seemed on the point of death. All this, I say , I might then have done; if each of these things could not singly have softened his obdurate feelings, yet all of them might. “Perhaps, too, there may be some fault in the servant that 332 ix. 609-641. was sent. He did not wait on him at a convenient moment; he did not
choose, I suppose, a fitting time; nor did he request both the
hour and his attention to be disengaged. ’Tis this that has undone me;
for he was not born of a tigress, nor does he carry in his breast hard
flints, or solid iron, or adamant; nor yet did he suck the milk of a
lioness. He will yet be won. Again must he be attacked. 58 And no
weariness will I admit of in the accomplishment of my design, so
long as this breath of mine shall remain. For the best thing (if
I could only recall what has been destined) would have been, not to
have made the attempt; the next best thing is, to urge the
accomplishment of what is begun; for he cannot (suppose I were to
relinquish my design) ever be unmindful of this my attempt; and because
I have desisted, I shall appear to have desired for but an instant,
or even to have been trying him, and to have solicited him with the
intention to betray; or, at least, I shall be thought not to have
been overcome by this God, who with such intensity now burns, and
has burnt my breast, but rather by lust. In fine, I cannot now be
guiltless of a wicked deed; I have both written to him , and
I have solicited him ; my inclination has been defiled. Though I
were to add nothing more, I cannot be pronounced innocent: as to
what remains, ’twill add much to the gratifying of my
wishes, but little to my criminality.” Thus she says; and (so great is the unsteadiness of her
wavering mind) though she is loath to try him, she has a wish to try
him, and she exceeds all bounds, and, to her misery, exposes
herself to be often repulsed. At length, when there is now no end to this , he flies from his country and the commission of this crime, and founds a new city 59 in a foreign land. But then, they
say that the daughter of Miletus, in her sadness, was bereft of all
understanding. Then did she tear her garments away from her breast, and
in her frenzy beat her arms. And now she is openly raving, and she
proclaims the unlawful hopes of unnatural lust. Deprived of these hopes , she deserts her native land, and her hated home, and
follows the steps of her flying brother. And as the Ismarian 60 Bacchanals, 333 ix. 641-664. son of Semele, aroused by thy thyrsus, celebrate thy triennial
festivals, as they return, no otherwise did the Bubasian matrons 61 see
Byblis howling over the wide fields; leaving which, she wandered through the country of the Carians, and the warlike Leleges, 62 and
Lycia. And now she has left behind Cragos, 63 and Lymira, 64 and the waves
of Xanthus, and the mountain in which the Chimæra had fire in its middle
parts, the breast and the face of a lioness, and the tail of a serpent.
The woods at length fail thee; when thou, Byblis, wearied with
following him, dost fall down, and laying thy tresses upon the hard
ground, art silent, and dost press the fallen leaves with thy face.
Often, too, do the Lelegeïan Nymphs endeavour to raise her in their
tender arms; often do they advise her to curb her passion, and they
apply consolation to a mind insensible to their advice . Silent
does Byblis lie, and she tears the green herbs with her nails, and
waters the grass with the stream of her tears. They say that the Naiads
placed beneath these tears a channel which could never become
dry; and what greater gift had they to bestow? Immediately, as drops
from the cut bark of the pitch tree, or as the viscid bitumen distils
from the impregnated earth, or as water which has frozen with the cold,
at the approach of Favonius, gently blowing, melts away in the sun, so
is Byblis, the descendant of Phœbus, dissolving in her tears, changed
into a fountain, which even now, in those vallies, bears the name of its
mistress, and flows beneath a gloomy oak. EXPLANATION. This shocking story has been also recounted by Antoninus Liberalis and
both he and Ovid have embellished it with circumstances, which are the
fruit of a lively imagination. They make Byblis travel over several
countries in search of her brother, who flies from her extravagant
passion, and they both agree in tracing her to Caria. There, according
to Antoninus Liberalis, she was transformed into a Hamadryad, just as
she was on 334 ix. 665-668. the point of throwing herself from the summit of a mountain. Ovid, on
the other hand, says that she was changed into a fountain, which
afterwards bore her name. It is, however, most probable, that if the story is founded on truth,
the whole of the circumstances happened in Caria; since we learn, both
from Apollodorus and Pausanias, that Miletus, her father, went from the
island of Crete to lead a colony into Caria, when he conquered a city,
to which he gave his own name. Pausanias says, that all the men of the
city being killed during the siege, the conquerors married their wives
and daughters. Cyanea, the daughter of Mæander, fell to the share of
Miletus, and Caunus and Byblis were the offspring of that marriage.
Byblis, having conceived a criminal passion for her brother, he was
obliged to leave his father’s court, that he might avoid her
importunities; upon which she died of grief. As she often went to weep
by a fountain, which was outside of the town, those who related the
adventure, magnified it, by stating that she was changed into the
fountain, which, after her death, bore her name. We are informed by
Photius, on the authority of the historian Conon, that it was Caunus who
fell in love with Byblis, and that she hanged herself upon a walnut
tree. Ovid also, in his ‘Art of Love,’ follows the tradition that she
hanged herself. ‘Arsit et est laqueo fortiter ulta nefas.’ Miletus lived
in the time of the first Minos, and, according to some writers, married
his daughter Acallis; but, having disagreed with his father-in-law, he
was obliged to leave Crete, and retired to Caria. The Persians had certain state ordinances, by which their monarchs were
enjoined to marry their own sisters; and, as Asia Minor was overrun by
them at the time when Crœsus was conquered by Cyrus, it is possible that
the story of Byblis and Caunus may have originated in the disgust which
the natives felt for their conquerors, and as a covert reproach to them
for sanctioning alliances of so incestuous a nature. While Ovid enters
into details in the story, which trench on the rules of modesty and
decorum, the moral of the tale, aided by some of his precepts, is not
uninstructive as a warning to youth to learn betimes how to regulate the
passions. FABLE VI. Ligdus commands his wife Telethusa, who
is pregnant, to destroy the infant, should it prove to be a girl; on
which, the Goddess Isis appears to her in a dream, and, forbidding her
to obey, promises her her protection. Telethusa is delivered of a
daughter, who is called Iphis, and passes for a son. Iphis is afterwards
married to Ianthe, on which, Isis, to reward her mother’s piety,
transforms her into a man. The fame of this new prodigy would, perhaps, have filled the hundred
cities of Crete, if Crete had not lately produced a nearer wonder of
her own , in the change of Iphis. For once on a time the Phæstian land 65 adjoining to the 335 ix. 668-691. Gnossian kingdom produced one Ligdus, of obscure name, a man of the
freeborn class of common people. Nor were his means any greater than his
rank, but his life and his honour were untainted. He startled the ears
of his wife in her pregnancy, with these words, when her lying-in was
near at hand: “Two things there are which I wish for; that thou mayst be
delivered with very little pain, and that thou mayst bring forth a male
child. The other alternative is a cause of greater trouble, and
providence has denied us means for bringing up a female . The
thing I abominate; but if a female should, by chance, be brought forth
at thy delivery, (I command it with reluctance, forgive me, natural
affection) let it be put to death.” Thus he said, and they bathed
their faces with tears streaming down; both he who commanded, and she to
whom the commands were given. But yet Telethusa incessantly urged her
husband, with fruitless entreaties, not to confine his hopes within a
compass so limited. But Ligdus’s resolution was fixed. And now was she hardly able to bear her womb big with the
burden ripe for birth; when in the middle of the night, under the form
of a vision, the daughter of Inachus, attended by a train of her
votaries, either stood, or seemed to stand, before her bed. The horns of
the moon were upon her forehead, with ears of corn with their bright
golden colour, and the royal ornament of the diadem ; with her was
the barking Anubis, 66 and the holy Bubastis, 67 and the particoloured
Apis; 68 he, too, who suppresses 69 his voice, and with 336 ix. 691-711. his finger enjoins silence. There were the sistra too, and Osiris, 70 never enough sought for; and the foreign serpent, 71 filled with
soporiferous poison. When thus the Goddess addressed her, as though
roused from her sleep, and seeing all distinctly:
“O Telethusa, one of my votaries, lay aside thy grievous cares, and
evade the commands of thy husband; and do not hesitate, when Lucina
shall have given thee ease by delivery, to bring up the child ,
whatever it shall be. I am a befriending Goddess, 72 and, when
invoked, I give assistance; and thou shalt not complain that thou
hast worshipped an ungrateful Divinity.” Thus she advises her, and then retires from her
chamber. The Cretan matron arises joyful from her bed; and suppliantly
raising her pure hands towards the stars of heaven , prays that
her vision may be fulfilled. When her pains increased, and her burden
forced itself into the light, and a girl was born to the father unaware
of it, the mother ordered it to be brought up, pretending it was a boy;
and the thing gained belief, nor was any one but the nurse acquainted
with the fact. The father performed his vows, and gave the child the name of its grandfather. The grandfather had been called Iphis. The
mother rejoiced in that name because it was common to both sexes ,
nor would she be deceiving 73 any one by it. Her deception lay
unperceived under this fraud, the result of natural affection. The 337 ix. 711-743. child’s dress was that of a boy; the face such, that, whether you
gave it to a girl or to a boy, either would be beautiful. In the
meantime the third year had now succeeded the tenth, when her
father, O Iphis, promised to thee, in marriage, the yellow-haired
Iänthe, who was a virgin the most commended among all the women of
Phæstus, for the endowments of her beauty; the daughter of the Dictæan
Telestes. Equal was their age, their beauty equal; and they received
their first instruction, the elements suited to their age, from
the same preceptor. Love, in consequence, touches the inexperienced breasts of them both,
and inflicts on each an equal wound; but how different are their
hopes! Iänthe awaits the time of their union, and of the ceremonial
agreed upon, and believes that she, whom she thinks to be a man, will be her husband . Iphis is in love with her whom she despairs to be
able to enjoy, and this very thing increases her flame; and, herself a maid, she burns with passion for a maid. And, with
difficulty, suppressing her tears, she says, “What issue of my
love awaits me, whom the anxieties unknown to any before , and so unnatural, of an unheard-of passion, have seized upon? if the
Gods would spare me, (they ought to have destroyed me, and if they would
not have destroyed me), at least they should have inflicted some natural
evil, and one common to the human race . Passion for a cow
does not inflame a cow, nor does that for mares inflame the
mares. The ram inflames the ewes; its own female follows the buck. And
so do birds couple; and among all animals, no female is seized with
passion for a female. Would that I did not exist. “Yet, lest Crete might not be the producer of all kinds of prodigies, the daughter of the Sun loved a bull; that is to say,
a female loved a male. My passion, if I confess the truth,
is more extravagant than that. Still she pursued the hopes of enjoyment;
still, by a subtle contrivance, and under the form of a cow, did she
couple with the bull, and her paramour was one that might be deceived.
But though the ingenuity of the whole world were to centre here, though
Dædalus himself were to fly back again with his waxen wings, what could
he do? Could he, by his skilful arts, make me from a maiden into a
youth? or could he transform 338 ix. 743-772. thee, Iänthe? But why dost thou not fortify thy mind, and recover
thyself, Iphis? And why not shake off this passion, void of all reason, and senseless as it is ? Consider what it was thou wast
born (unless thou art deceiving thyself as well), and pursue that which
is allowable, and love that which, as a woman, thou oughtst to
love . Hope it is that produces, Hope it is that nourishes love.
This, the very case itself deprives thee of. No guard is
keeping thee away from her dear embrace; no care of a watchful husband,
no father’s severity; does not she herself deny thy solicitations. And
yet she cannot be enjoyed by thee; nor, were everything possible done,
couldst thou be blessed; not , though Gods and men were to do
their utmost. And now, too, no portion of my desires is baffled, and the
compliant Deities have granted me whatever they were able, and what I desire , my father wishes, she herself wishes, and so does my destined father-in-law; but nature, more powerful than all these,
wills it not; she alone is an obstacle to me. Lo, the longed-for time
approaches, and the wedding-day is at hand, when Iänthe should be mine;
and yet she will not fall to my lot. In the midst of water,
I shall be athirst. Why, Juno, guardian of the marriage rites, and
why, Hymenæus, do you come to this ceremonial, where there is not the
person who should marry the wife , and where both of us
females , we are coupled in wedlock?” After saying these words, she closes her lips. And no less
does the other maid burn, and she prays thee, Hymenæus, to come quickly.
Telethusa, dreading the same thing that she desires, at one time puts
off the time of the wedding , and then raises delays, by feigning
illness. Often, by way of excuse, she pretends omens and visions. But
now she has exhausted all the resources of fiction; and the time for the
marriage so long delayed is now at hand, and only one day remains; whereon she takes off the fillets for the hair from her
own head and from that of her daughter, 74 and embracing the altar with
dishevelled locks, she says, “O Isis, thou who dost inhabit 339 ix. 772-795. Parætonium, 75 and the Mareotic fields, 76 and Pharos, 77 and the
Nile divided into its seven horns, give aid, I beseech thee, and
ease me of my fears. Thee, Goddess, thee, I once beheld, and these
thy symbols; and all of them I recognized; both thy attendants,
and thy torches, and the sound of the sistra, and I noted thy commands
with mindful care. That this girl 78 now sees the
light, that I, myself, am not punished, is the result of thy
counsel, and thy admonition; pity us both, and aid us with thy
assistance.” Tears followed her words. The Goddess seemed to move, (and she really did move) her altars; and the doors of her temple shook.
Her horns, too, 79 shone, resembling those of the moon, and the
tinkling sistrum sounded. The mother departs from the temple, not free
from concern indeed, still pleased with this auspicious omen. Iphis
follows her, her companion as she goes, with longer strides than she had
been wont; her fairness does not continue on her face; both her strength
is increased, and her features are more stern; and shorter is the length
of her scattered locks. There is more vigour, also, than she had as a female. And now thou art a male, who so lately wast a
female. Bring offerings to the temple, and rejoice with no hesitating
confidence. They do bring their offerings to the temple. They add, too,
an inscription; the inscription contains one short line: “Iphis,
a male, offers the presents, which, as a female, he had vowed.” The following morn has disclosed the wide world with the rays of
the Sun ; when Venus, and Juno, and Hymenæus, 340 ix. 795-796. repair to the social fires 80 ; and Iphis, now a youth,
gains his dear Iänthe. EXPLANATION. The story of Iphis being changed from a young woman into a man, of which
Ovid lays the scene in the isle of Crete, is one of those facts upon
which ancient history is entirely silent. Perhaps, the origin of the
story was a disguise of a damsel in male dress, carried on, for family
reasons, even to the very point of marriage; or it may have been based
upon an account of some remarkable instance of androgynous
formation. Ovid may possibly have invented the story himself, merely as a vehicle
for showing how the Deities recompense piety and strict obedience to
their injunctions. 1. The Neptunian hero. ]—Ver. 1. Theseus was the grandson of
Neptune, through his father Ægeus. 2. Deïanira. ]—Ver. 9. She was the daughter of Œneus, king of
Ætolia, and became the wife of Hercules. 3. Parthaon. ]—Ver. 12. He was the son of Agenor and Epicaste.
Homer, however, makes Portheus, and not Parthaon, to have been the
father of Œneus. 4. Amid thy realms. ]—Ver. 18. The river Acheloüs flowed
between Ætolia and Acarnania. 5. Bent inwards. ]—Ver. 33. ‘Varus,’ which we here translate
‘bent inwards,’ according to some authorities, means ‘bent
outwards.’ 6. Casting of yellow sand. ]—Ver. 35. It was the custom of
wrestlers, after they had anointed the body with ‘ceroma’ or wrestler’s
oil, in order to render the body supple and pliant, to sprinkle the body
with sand, or dust, to enable the antagonist to take a firm hold. It
was, however, considered more praiseworthy to conquer in a contest which
was ἀκονιτὶ ‘without the
use of sand.’ 7. Most beauteous mate. ]—Ver. 47. Clarke translates
‘nitidissima conjux,’ ‘the neatest cow.’ 8. Recourse to my arts. ]—Ver. 62. ‘Devertor ad artes,’ is
rendered by Clarke, ‘I fly to my tricks.’ 9. To conquer serpents. ]—Ver. 67. Hercules, while an infant in
his cradle, was said to have strangled two serpents, which Juno sent for
the purpose of destroying him. 10. Hundred in number. ]—Ver. 71. The number of heads of the
Hydra varies in the accounts given by different writers. Seven, nine,
fifty, and a hundred are the numbers mentioned. This, however, is not
surprising, as we are told that where one was cut off, two sprang up in
their place, until Hercules, to prevent such consequences, adopted the
precaution of searing the neck, where the head had been cut off, with a
red hot iron. 11. Nessus. ]—Ver. 101. He was one of the Centaurs which were
begotten by Ixion the cloud sent by Jupiter, under the form of Juno. 12. Evenus. ]—Ver. 104. This was a river of Ætolia, which was
also called by the name of ‘Lycormas.’ 13. Strong of limb. ]—Ver. 108. ‘Membrisque valens,’ is rendered
by Clarke, ‘being an able-limbed fellow.’ 14. Wheel of thy father. ]—Ver. 124. He alludes to the
punishment of Ixion, the father of Nessus, who was fastened to a
revolving wheel in the Infernal Regions, as a punishment for his attempt
on the chastity of Juno. 15. Thou dost confide. ]—Ver. 125. ‘Quamvis ope fidis equinâ,’
is translated by Clarke, ‘Although thou trustest to the help of thy
horse part.’ 16. Cenæan Jupiter. ]—Ver. 136. Jupiter was called Cenæan, from
Cenæum, a promontory of Eubœa, where Hercules, after having taken
the town of Œchalia, built an altar in honour of Jupiter. Hercules slew
Eurytus, the king of Œchalia, and carried away his daughter Iole. 17. Lichas. ]—Ver. 155. This was the attendant of Hercules, whom
he sent to Deïanira for the garment which he used to wear while
performing sacrifice. 18. The savage Antæus. ]—Ver. 183. He alludes to the fresh
strength which the giant Antæus gained each time he touched the
earth. 19. Iberian shepherd. ]—Ver. 184. Allusion is here made to
Geryon, who had three bodies, and whom Hercules slew, and then carried
away his herds. It has been suggested that the story of his triple form
originated in the fact that he and his two brothers reigned amicably in
conjunction over some portion of Spain, or the islands adjoining to
it. 20. Parthenian. ]—Ver. 188. A part of Arcadia was so called
from Parthenium, a mountain which divided it from Argolis; there
was also, according to Pliny the Elder, a town of the same name in
Arcadia. 21. Gold of Thermodon. ]—Ver. 189. The Thermodon was a river of
Scythia, near which the Amazons were said to dwell. Eurystheus ordered
Hercules to bring to him the belt of Hippolyta, the queen of the
Amazons. 22. Support the heavens. ]—Ver. 198. Atlas, king of Mauritania,
was said to support the heavens on his shoulders, of which burden
Hercules relieved him for a time, when he partook of his hospitality. It
has been suggested that the meaning of this story is, that Hercules
learned the study of astronomy from Atlas. 23. Wife of Jupiter. ]—Ver. 199. Juno gave her commands to
Hercules through Eurystheus, the son of Sthenelus, king of Mycenæ, who
imposed upon him his various labours. 24. Many a hailstone. ]—Ver. 222. Ovid here seems to think that
snow is an intermediate state between rain and hail, and that hail is
formed by the rapid motion of the snow as it falls. 25. The son of Pœas. ]—Ver. 233. Philoctetes was the son of
Pœas. 26. Again to visit. ]—Ver. 232. It was decreed by the destinies
that Troy should not be taken, unless the bow and arrows of Hercules
were present; for which reason it was necessary to send for Philoctetes,
who was the possessor of them. Troy had already seen them, when Hercules
punished Laomedon, its king, for his perfidious conduct. 27. Roared. ]—Ver. 239. ‘Diffusa sonabat—flamma’ is
translated by Clarke, ‘The flame, being diffused on all sides,
rattled.’ 28. Protector of the earth. ]—Ver. 241. Hercules merited this
character, for having cleared the earth of monsters, robbers, and
tyrants. 29. Atlas was sensible. ]—Ver. 273. By reason of his supporting
the heavens, to the inhabitants of which Hercules was now added. 30. Ilithyïa. ]—Ver. 283. This Goddess is said by some to have
been the daughter of Jupiter and Juno, while other writers consider her
to have been the same either with Diana, or Juno Lucina. 31. The two Nixi. ]—Ver. 294. Festus says, ‘the three statues in
the Capitol, before the shrine of Minerva, were called the Gods Nixii.’
Nothing whatever is known of these Gods, who appear to have been
obstetrical Divinities. It has been suggested, as there were three of
them, that the reading should be, not ‘Nixosque pares,’ but ‘Nixosque
Lares,’ ‘and the Lares the Nixi.’ 32. Form of a comb. ]—Ver. 299. This charm probably was
suggestive of difficult or impeded parturition, the bones of the pelvis
being firmly knit together in manner somewhat resembling the fingers
when inserted one between the other, instead of yielding for the passage
of the infant. Pliny the Elder informs us how parturition may be impeded
by the use of charms. 33. Something unusual. ]—Ver. 309. ‘Nescio quid.’ This very
indefinite phrase is repeatedly used by Ovid; and in such cases, it
expresses either actual doubt or uncertainty, as in the present
instance; or it is used to denote something remarkable or indescribable,
or to show that a thing is insignificant, mean, and contemptible. 34. Goddess who presides. ]—Ver. 315. This was Ilithyïa, or
Lucina, who was acting as the emissary of Juno. 35. From the mouth. ]—Ver. 323. This notion is supposed to have
been grounded on the fact of the weasel (like many other animals)
carrying her young in her mouth from place to place. 36. Her daughter-in-law. ]—Ver. 325. Iole was the wife of
Hyllus, the son of Deïanira, by Hercules. 37. Lust of Priapus. ]—Ver. 347. ‘Fugiens obscœna Priapi,’ is
rendered by Clarke, ‘Flying from the nasty attempts of Priapus upon
her.’ 38. Most wretched father. ]—Ver. 363. Eurytus was the father of
Dryope. 39. From my eyes. ]—Ver. 390. This alludes to the custom among
the ancients of closing the eyes of the dying, which duty was performed
by the nearest relations, who, closing the eyes and mouth, called upon
the dying person by name, and exclaimed ‘Vale,’ ‘farewell.’ 40. Iolaüs. ]—Ver. 399. He was the son of Iphiclus, the brother
of Hercules. See the Explanation in the next page. 41. Civil warfare. ]—Ver. 404. This alludes to the Theban war,
carried on between Eteocles and Polynices, the sons of Œdipus and
Jocasta. Agreeing to reign in alternate years, Eteocles refused to give
place to his brother when his year had terminated, on which Polynices
fled to the court of Adrastus, king of Argos, and raised troops against
his brother. 42. While he still lives. ]—Ver. 407. This was Amphiaraüs, the
son of Œcleus, and Hypermnestra, who was betrayed by his wife
Eriphyle. 43. Daughter-in-law. ]—Ver. 415. Hebe, the Goddess of Youth, was
the daughter of Juno alone, without the participation of Jupiter; and
from this circumstance she is styled the step-daughter of Jupiter. She
was also his daughter-in-law on becoming the wife of Hercules. 44. The complaint was. ]—Ver. 420. ‘Murmur erat,’ is rendered by
Clarke, ‘The grumbling was, why, &c.’ 45. Iäsion. ]—Ver. 422. Iäsius, or Iäsion, was the son of
Jupiter and Electra, and was the father of Plutus, the God of Riches, by
the Goddess Cybele. 46. Every God has. ]—Ver. 425-6. ‘Cui studeat, Deus omnis habet
crescitque favore Turbida seditio.’ Clarke thus renders these words,
‘Every God has somebody to stickle for, and a turbulent sedition arises
by their favours for their darlings.’ 47. Son of Deione. ]—Ver. 442. According to some writers,
Miletus was the son of Apollo and Deione, though others say that Thia
was the name of his mother. He was the founder of the celebrated city of
Miletus, in Caria, a country of Asia Minor. 48. Does not think. ]—Ver. 457. Clarke translates this line,
‘Nor does she think she does amiss that she so often tips him a kiss.’
Antoninus Liberalis says, that Eidothea, the daughter of the king of
Paria, and not Cyane, was the mother of Byblis and Caunus. 49. Sweetheart. ]—Ver. 465. The word ‘dominus’ was often used as
a term of endearment between lovers. 50. Married Ops. ]—Ver. 497. Ops, the daughter of Cœlus or
Uranus, who was also called Cybele, Rhea, and ‘the great Mother,’ was
fabled to have been the wife of her brother Saturn; while Oceanus, the
son of Cœlus and Vesta, married his sister Tethys. 51. Sons of Æolus. ]—Ver. 506. Æolus had six sons, to whom he
was said to have given their sisters for wives. In the case, however, of
his daughter Canace, who was pregnant by her brother Macareus, Æolus was
more severe, as he sent her a sword, with which to put herself to
death. 52. Clean wax tablets. ]—Ver. 521. Before the tablet was written
upon, the wax was ‘vacua,’ empty; or, as we say of writing-paper,
‘clean.’ There was a blunt end to the upper part of the ‘stylus,’ or
iron pen, with which the wax was smoothed down when any writing was
erased. 53. Without my name. ]—Ver. 531-2. ‘Sine nomine vellem Posset
agi mea causa meo,’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘I could wish my business
might be transacted without my name.’ 54. In the margin. ]—Ver. 564. Clarke translates, ‘Summusque in
margine versus adhæsit,’ ‘And the last line was clapped into the
margin.’ 55. Meandrian youth. ]—Ver. 573. Caunus was the grandson of the
river Mæander. 56. Part of my sail. ]—Ver. 589. She borrows this metaphor from
sailors, who, before setting out, sometimes unfurl a little portion of
the sail, to see how the wind blows. 57. Rather of the two. ]—Ver. 598. Willing to believe anything
in the wrong rather than herself; she is sure that the day was an
unlucky one. 58. Be attacked. ]—Ver. 615. ‘Repeteudas erit,’ Clarke
translates, ‘I must at him again.’ 59. Founds a new city. ]—Ver. 633. This was Caunus, a city
of Caria. 60. Ismarian. ]—Ver. 641. Ismarus was a mountain of Thrace. The
festival here alluded to was the ‘trieterica,’ or triennial feast of
Bacchus. 61. Bubasian matrons. ]—Ver. 643. We learn from Pliny the Elder
that Bubasus was a region of Caria. 62. Leleges. ]—Ver. 644. The Leleges were a warlike people of
Caria, in Asia Minor, who were supposed to have sprung from Grecian
emigrants, who first inhabited the adjacent island, and afterwards the
continent. They were said to have their name from the Greek word λελεγμένοι ‘gathered,’
because they were collected from various places. 63. Cragos. ]—Ver. 645. Cragos was a mountain of Lycia. 64. Lymira. ]—Ver. 645. This was a city of Lycia, near
Cragos. 65. Phæstian land. ]—Ver. 668. Phæstus was a city of Crete,
built by Minos. 66. Anubis. ]—Ver. 689. This was an Egyptian Deity, which had
the body of a man, and the head of a dog. Some writers say that it was
Mercury who was so represented, and that this form was given him in
remembrance of the fact of Isis having used dogs in her search for
Osiris, when he was slain by his brother Typhon. Other authors say, that
Anubis was the son of Osiris, and that he distinguished himself with an
helmet, bearing the figure of a dog, when he followed his father to
battle. 67. Bubastis. ]—Ver. 690. Though she is here an attendant of
Isis, Diodorus Siculus represents her to have been the same divinity as
Isis. Herodotus, however, says that Diana was worshipped by the
Egyptians under that name. There was a city of Lower Egypt, called
Bubastis, in which Isis was greatly venerated. 68. Apis. ]—Ver. 690. This is supposed to have been another name
for Osiris, whose body, having been burned on the funeral pile, the
Egyptians believed that he re-appeared under the form of a bull; the
name for which animal was ‘apis.’ 69. Who suppresses. ]—Ver. 691. This was the Egyptian divinity
Harpocrates, the God of Secresy and Silence, who was represented with
his finger laid on his lips. 70. Osiris. ]—Ver. 692. When slain by his brother Typhon, Isis
long sought him in vain, till, finding his scattered limbs by the aid of
dogs, she entombed them. As the Egyptians had a yearly festival, at
which they bewailed the loss of Osiris, and feigned that they were
seeking him, Ovid calls that God, ‘Nunquam satis quæsitus,’ ‘Never
enough sought for.’ 71. Foreign serpent. ]—Ver. 693. This is, most probably, the
asp, a small serpent of Egypt, which is frequently found
represented on the statues of Isis. Its bite was said to produce a
lethargic sleep, ending in death. Cleopatra ended her life by the bite
of one, which she ordered to be conveyed to her in a basket of fruit.
Some commentators have supposed that the crocodile is here alluded to;
but, as others have justly observed, the crocodile has no poisonous
sting, but rather a capacity for devouring. 72. A befriending Goddess. ]—Ver. 698. Diodorus Siculus says,
that Isis was the discoverer of numerous remedies for disease, and that
she greatly improved the healing art. 73. Be deceiving. ]—Ver. 709. The name ‘Iphis’ being equally
well for a male or a female. 74. Of her daughter. ]—Ver. 770. We must suppose that Iphis wore
the ‘vitta,’ which was an article of female dress, in private only, and
in presence of her mother. Of course, in public, such an ornament would
not have suited her, when appearing in the character of a man. 75. Parætonium. ]—Ver. 772. Strabo says, that Parætonium was a
city of Libya, with a capacious harbour. 76. Mareotic fields. ]—Ver. 772. The Mareotic Lake was in the
neighbourhood of the city of Alexandria. 77. Pharos. ]—Ver. 772. This was an island opposite to
Alexandria, famed for its light-house, which was erected to warn sailors
from off the dangerous quicksands in the neighbourhood. 78. This girl. ]—Ver. 778. Pointing at Iphis, who had attended
her, Antoninus Liberalis says, that Telethusa prayed that Iphis might be
transformed into a man, and cited a number of precedents for such a
change. 79. Her horns too. ]—Ver. 783. Isis was sometimes worshipped
under the form of a cow, to the horns of which reference is here
made. 80. The social fires. ]—Ver. 795. On the occasion of marriages,
offerings were made on the altars of Hymenæus and the other Deities, who
were the guardians of conjugal rites. 341 BOOK THE TENTH. FABLE I. Eurydice , the wife of Orpheus, while
sporting in the fields, with other Nymphs, is bitten by a serpent, which
causes her death. After having mourned for her, Orpheus resolves to go
down to the Infernal Regions in quest of her. Pluto and the Fates
consent to her return, on condition that Orpheus shall not look on her
till he is out of their dominions. His curiosity prevailing, he neglects
this injunction, on which she is immediately snatched away from him,
beyond the possibility of recovery. Upon this occasion, the Poet relates
the story of a shepherd, who was turned into a rock by a look of
Cerberus; and that of Olenus and Lethæa, who were transformed into
stones. Thence Hymenæus, clad in a saffron-coloured 1 robe, passed through
the unmeasured tract of air, and directed his course to the regions of
the Ciconians 2 , and, in vain, was invoked by the voice of Orpheus. He
presented himself indeed, but he brought with him neither auspicious
words, nor joyful looks, nor yet a happy omen. The torch, too,
which he held, was hissing with a smoke that brought tears to the eyes,
and as it was, it found no flames amid its waving. The issue was more
disastrous than the omens; for the newmade bride, while she was
strolling along the grass, attended by a train of Naiads, was killed,
having received the sting of a serpent on her ancle. After the Rhodopeïan bard had sufficiently bewailed her in the upper realms of air, that he might try the shades below as well, he
dared to descend to Styx by the Tænarian gate, and amid the phantom
inhabitants and ghosts that had enjoyed 342 x. 15-47. the tomb, he went to Persephone, and him that held these unpleasing
realms, the Ruler of the shades; and touching his strings in concert
with his words, he thus said, “O ye Deities of the world that lies
beneath the earth, to which we all come at last , each that
is born to mortality; if I may be allowed, and you suffer me to speak
the truth, laying aside 3 the artful expressions of a deceitful tongue;
I have not descended hither from curiosity to see dark
Tartarus, nor to bind the threefold throat of the Medusæan monster,
bristling with serpents. But my wife was the cause of my coming;
into whom a serpent, trodden upon by her , diffused its poison,
and cut short her growing years. I was wishful to be able to endure this , and I will not deny that I have endeavoured to do
so . Love has proved the stronger. That God is well known in the
regions above. Whether he be so here, too, I am uncertain; but yet
I imagine that even here he is; and if the story of the rape of former
days is not untrue, ’twas love that united you two together. By
these places filled with horrors, by this vast Chaos, and by the silence
of these boundless realms, I entreat you, weave over again the
quick-spun thread of the life of Eurydice. “To you we all belong; and having staid but a little while above , sooner or later we all hasten to one abode. Hither
are we all hastening. This is our last home; and you possess the most
lasting dominion over the human race. She, too, when, in due season she
shall have completed her allotted number of years, will be under
your sway. The enjoyment of her I beg as a favour. But if the
Fates deny me this privilege in behalf of my wife, I have
determined that I will not return. Triumph in the death of us both.” As he said such things, and touched the strings to his words, the
bloodless spirits wept. Tantalus did not catch at the retreating water,
and the wheel of Ixion stood still, as though in amazement; the
birds did not tear the liver of Tityus ; and the granddaughters of
Belus paused at their urns; thou, too, Sisyphus, didst seat thyself on
thy stone. The story is, that then, for the first time, the cheeks of
the Eumenides, overcome by his music, were wet with tears; nor could the
royal consort, nor he who rules the infernal regions, endure 343 x. 47-75. to deny him his request; and they called for Eurydice. She was among the
shades newly arrived, and she advanced with a slow pace, by reason of
her wound. The Rhodopeïan hero receives her, and, at the same time, this condition, that he turn not back his eyes until he has passed the
Avernian vallies, or else that the grant will be revoked. The ascending
path is mounted in deep silence, steep, dark, and enveloped in deepening
gloom. And now they were not far from the verge of the upper
earth. He, enamoured, fearing lest she should flag, and impatient to
behold her, turned his eyes; and immediately she sank back again. She,
hapless one! both stretching out her arms, and struggling to be grasped,
and to grasp him, caught nothing but the fleeting air. And now, dying a
second time, she did not at all complain of her husband; for why should
she complain of being beloved? And now she pronounced the last farewell,
which scarcely did he catch with his ears; and again was she hurried
back to the same place. No otherwise was Orpheus amazed at this twofold death of his wife,
than he who, trembling, beheld the three necks 4 of the dog, the middle
one supporting chains; whom fear did not forsake, before his former
nature deserted him , as stone gathered over his body: and than Olenus, 5 who took on himself the crime of another , and
was willing to appear guilty; and than thou, unhappy Lethæa,
confiding in thy beauty; breasts, once most united, now rocks, which the
watery Ida supports. The ferryman drove him away entreating, and, in
vain, desiring again to cross the stream . Still, for seven days,
in squalid guise 6 did he sit on the banks without the gifts of Ceres.
Vexation, 344 x. 75-85. and sorrow of mind, and tears were his sustenance. Complaining that the
Deities of Erebus 7 were cruel, he betook himself to lofty Rhodope, and
Hæmus, 8 buffeted by the North winds. The third Titan had now ended the year bounded by the Fishes of the ocean; 9 and
Orpheus had avoided all intercourse with woman, either because it had
ended in misfortune to him, or because he had given a promise to that
effect . Yet a passion possessed many a female to unite herself to
the bard, and many a one grieved when repulsed. He also was the first adviser of the people of Thrace to transfer their
affections to tender youths; and, on this side of manhood, to enjoy the
short spring of life, and its early flowers. EXPLANATION. Though Ovid has separated the adventures of Orpheus, whose death he does
not relate till the beginning of the eleventh Book, we will here shortly
enter upon an examination of some of the more important points of his
history. As, in his time, Poetry and Music were in a very low state of
perfection, and as he excelled in both of those arts, it was said that
he was the son of Apollo and the Muse Calliope; and it was added, that
he charmed lions and tigers, and made even the trees sensible of the
melodious tones of his lyre. These were mere hyperbolical expressions,
which signified the wondrous charms of his eloquence and of his music
combined, which he employed in cultivating the genius of a savage and
uncouth people. Some conjecture that this personage originally came from
Asia into Thrace, and suppose that he, together with Linus and Eumolpus,
brought poetry and music into Greece, the use of which, till then, was
unknown in that country; and that they introduced, at the same time, the
worship of Ceres, Mars, and the orgies of Bacchus, which, from him who
instituted them, received their name of ‘Orphica.’ Orpheus, too , is supposed to have
united the office of high priest with that of king. Horace styles him
the interpreter of the Gods; and he was said to have interposed with the
Deities for the deliverance of the Argonauts from a dangerous tempest.
It is thought that he passed some part of his life in Egypt, and became
acquainted with many particulars of the ancient religion of the
Egyptians, which he introduced into the theology of Greece. Some modern
writers even go so far as to suggest that he learned from the 345 Hebrews, who were then sojourning in Egypt, the knowledge of the true
God. His wife, Eurydice, dying very young, he was inconsolable for her loss.
To alleviate his grief, he went to Thesprotia, in Epirus, the natives of
which region were said to possess incantations, for the purpose of
raising the ghosts of the departed. Here, according to some accounts,
being deceived by a phantom, which was made to appear before him, he
died of sorrow; but, according to other writers, he renounced the
society of mankind for ever and retired to the mountains of Thrace. His
journey to that distant country gave occasion to say, that he descended
to the Infernal Regions. This is the more likely, as he is supposed to
have there promulgated his notions of the infernal world, which,
according to Diodorus Siculus, he had learned among the Egyptians. Tzetzes, however, assures us that this part of his history is founded on
the circumstance, that Orpheus cured his wife of the bite of a serpent,
which had till then been considered to be mortal; and that the poets
gave an hyperbolical version of the story, in saying that he had rescued
her from Hell. He says, too, that he had learned in Egypt the art of
magic, which was much cultivated there, and especially the method of
charming serpents. After the loss of his wife, he retired to mount Rhodope, to assuage the
violence of his grief. There, according to Ovid and other poets, the
Mænades, or Bacchanals, to be revenged for his contempt of them and
their rites, tore him in pieces; which story is somewhat diversified by
the writers who relate that Venus, exasperated against Calliope, the
mother of Orpheus, for having adjudged to Proserpine the possession of
Adonis, caused the women of Thrace to become enamoured of her son, and
to tear him in pieces while disputing the possession of him. An ancient
author, quoted by Hyginus, says that Orpheus was killed by the stroke of
a thunderbolt, while he was accompanying the Argonauts; and Apollodorus
says the same. Diodorus Siculus calls him one of the kings of Thrace;
while other writers, among whom are Cicero and Aristotle, assert that
there never was such a person as Orpheus. The learned Vossius says, that
the Phœnician word ‘ariph,’ which signifies ‘learned,’ gave rise to the
story of Orpheus. Le Clerc thinks that in consequence of the same Greek
word signifying ‘an enchanter,’ and also meaning ‘a singer,’ he acquired
the reputation of having been a most skilful magician. We may, perhaps, safely conclude, that Orpheus really did introduce the
worship of many Gods into Greece; and that, possibly, while he
promulgated the necessity of expiating crimes, he introduced exorcism,
and brought magic into fashion in Greece. Lucian affirms that he was
also the first to teach the elements of astronomy. Several works were
attributed to him, which are now no longer in existence; among which
were a Poem on the Expedition of the Argonauts, one on the War of the
Giants, another on the Rape of Proserpine, and a fourth upon the Labours
of Hercules. The Poem on the Argonautic Expedition, which now exists,
and is attributed to him, is supposed to have been really written by a
poet named Onomacritus, who lived in the sixth century B.C. , in the time of Pisistratus. 346 x. 86-99. After his death, Orpheus was reckoned in the number of Heroes or
Demigods; and we are informed by Philostratus that his head was
preserved at Lesbos, where it gave oracular responses. Orpheus is not
mentioned by Homer or Hesiod. The learned scholar Lobeck, in his
Aglaophamus, has entered very deeply into an investigation of the real
nature of the discoveries and institutions ascribed to him. FABLE II. Orpheus , retiring to Mount Rhodope, by
the charms of his music, attracts to himself all kinds of creatures,
rocks, and trees; among the latter is the pine tree, only known since
the transformation of Attis. There was a hill, and upon the hill a most level space of a plain,
which the blades of grass made green: all shade was wanting in
the spot. After the bard, sprung from the Gods, had seated himself in
this place, and touched his tuneful strings, a shade came over the
spot. The tree of Chaonia 10 was not absent, nor the grove of
the Heliades, 11 nor the mast-tree with its lofty branches, nor the
tender lime-trees, nor yet the beech, and the virgin laurel, 12 and
the brittle hazels, and the oak, adapted for making spears, and the fir
without knots, and the holm bending beneath its acorns, and the genial
plane-tree, 13 and the parti-coloured maple, 14 and, together with
them, the willows growing by the rivers, and the watery lotus, and the
evergreen box, and the slender tamarisks, and the two-coloured myrtle,
and the tine-tree, 15 with its azure berries. You, too, the ivy-trees, with your creeping tendrils, came, 347 x. 99-105. and together, the branching vines, and the elms clothed with vines; the
ashes, too, and the pitch-trees, and the arbute, laden with its blushing
fruit, and the bending palm, 16 the reward of the conqueror; the
pine, too, with its tufted foliage, 17 and bristling at the top,
pleasing to the Mother of the Gods; since for this the Cybeleïan Attis
put off the human form, and hardened into that trunk. EXPLANATION. The story of Attis, or Athis, here briefly referred to, is related by
the ancient writers in many different ways; so much so, that it is not
possible to reconcile the discrepancy that exists between them. From
Diodorus Siculus we learn that Cybele, the daughter of Mæon, King of
Phrygia, falling in love with a young shepherd named Attis, her father
ordered him to be put to death. In despair, at the loss of her lover,
Cybele left her father’s abode, and, accompanied by Marsyas, crossed the
mountains of Phrygia. Apollo, (or, as Vossius supposes, some priest of
that God,) touched with the misfortunes of the damsel, took her to the
country of the Hyperboreans in Scythia, where she died. Some time after,
the plague ravaging Phrygia, and the oracle being consulted, an answer
was returned, that, to ensure the ceasing of the contagion, they must
look for the body of Attis, and give it funeral rites, and render to
Cybele the same honour which they were wont to pay to the Gods: all
which was done with such scrupulous care, that in time she became one of
the most esteemed Divinities. Arnobius, says that Attis was a shepherd, with whom Cybele fell in love
in her old age. Unmoved by her rank, and repelled by her faded charms,
he despised her advances. Midas, King of Pessinus, on seeing this,
destined his own daughter, Agdistis, for the young Attis. Fearing the
resentment of Cybele, he caused the gates of the city to be shut on the
day on which the marriage was to be solemnized. Cybele being informed of
this, hastened to Pessinus, and, destroying the gates, met with Attis,
who had concealed himself behind a pine tree, and caused him to be
emasculated; on which Agdistis committed self-destruction in a fit of
sorrow. Servius, Lactantius, and St. Augustine, give another version of the
story, which it is not necessary here to enlarge upon, any farther than
to say, that it depicts the love of a powerful queen for a young man who
repulsed her advances. Ovid, also, gives a similar account in the fourth
Book of the Fasti, line 220. Other authors, quoted by Arnobius, have
given some additional circumstances, the origin of which it is 348 x. 106-114. almost impossible to guess at. They say that a female called Nana, by
touching a pomegranate or an almond tree, which grew from the blood of
Agdistis whom Bacchus had slain, conceived Attis, who afterwards became
very dear to Cybele. All that we can conclude from these accounts, and more especially from
that given by Ovid in the Fasti, is, that the worship of Cybele being
established in Phrygia, Attis was one of her priests; and that, as he
led the example of mutilating himself, all her other priests, who were
called Galli, submitted to a similar operation, to the great surprise of
the uninitiated, who were not slow in inventing some wonderful story to
account for an act so extraordinary. FABLE III. Cyparissus is about to kill himself for
having slain, by accident, a favourite deer; but, before he is able
to execute his design, Apollo transforms him into a Cypress. Amid this throng was present the cypress, resembling the cone, 18 now a tree, but once a youth, beloved by that
God who fits the lyre with the strings, and the bow with strings. For
there was a large stag, sacred to the Nymphs who inhabit the Carthæan
fields; and, with his horns extending afar, he himself afforded an ample
shade to his own head. His horns were shining with gold, and a necklace
studded with gems, 19 falling upon his shoulders, hung down from
his smooth round neck; a silver ball, 20 fastened with
little straps, played upon his forehead; 349 x. 114-134. and pendants of brass, 21 of equal size, shone on either ear around his
hollow temples. He, too, void of fear, and laying aside his natural
timorousness, used to frequent the houses, and to offer his neck to be
patted by any hands, even though unknown to him . But yet, above all others, he was pleasing to thee, Cyparissus, most
beauteous of the nation of Cea. 22 Thou wast wont to lead the stag to
new pastures, and to the streams of running waters; sometimes thou didst
wreathe flowers of various colours about his horns, and at other times,
seated on his back, like a horseman, first in this
direction and then in that, thou didst guide his easy mouth with
the purple bridle. ’Twas summer and the middle of the day, and the
bending arms of the Crab, that loves the sea-shore, were glowing with
the heat of the sun; the stag, fatigued, was reclining his body on the
grassy earth, and was enjoying the coolness from the shade of a tree. By
inadvertence the boy Cyparissus pierced him with a sharp javelin; and,
when he saw him dying from the cruel wound, he resolved to attempt to
die as well . What consolations did not Phœbus apply? and he
advised him to grieve with moderation, and 350 x. 134-144. according to the occasion. Still did he lament, and as a last favour, he
requested this of the Gods above, that he might mourn for ever. And now,
his blood quite exhausted by incessant weeping, his limbs began to be
changed into a green colour, and the hair, which but lately hung from
his snow-white forehead, to become a rough bush, and, a stiffness
being assumed, to point to the starry heavens with a tapering top. The
God Phœbus lamented deeply, and in his sorrow he said, “Thou
shalt be mourned by me, and shalt mourn for others, and shalt ever attend upon those who are sorrowing 23 for the
dead .” EXPLANATION. Cyparissus, who, according to Ovid was born at Carthæa, a town in
the isle of Cea, was probably a youth of considerable poetical talent
and proficiency in the polite arts, which caused him to be deemed the
favourite of Apollo. His transformation into a Cypress is founded on the
resemblance between their names, that tree being called by the Greeks κυπάρισσος . The
conclusion of the story is that Apollo, to console himself, enjoined
that the Cypress tree should be the symbol of sorrow, or in other words
that it should be used at funerals and be planted near graves and
sepulchres; which fiction was most likely founded on the fact, that the
tree was employed for those purposes; perhaps because its branches,
almost destitute of leaves, have a somewhat melancholy aspect. Some ancient writers also tell us that Cyparissus was a youth beloved by
the God Sylvanus, for which reason that God is often represented with
branches of Cypress in his hand. FABLE IV. Jupiter , charmed with the beauty of the
youth Ganymede, transforms himself into an Eagle, for the purpose of
carrying him off. He is taken up into Heaven, and is made the Cup-bearer
of the Divinities. Such a grove of trees had the bard attracted round him ,
and he sat in the midst of an assembly of wild beasts, and of a
multitude 351 x. 144-161. of birds. When he had sufficiently tried the strings struck with his
thumb, and perceived that the various tones, though they gave different
sounds, still harmonize, in this song he raised his voice:
“Begin, my parent Muse, my song from Jove, all things submit to the sway
of Jove. By me, often before has the power of Jove been sung. In loftier
strains have I sung of the Giants, and the victorious thunderbolts
scattered over the Phlegræan plains. 24 Now is there occasion for a
softer lyre; and let us sing of youths beloved by the Gods above, and of
girls surprised by unlawful flames, who, by their wanton desires, have
been deserving of punishment. “The king of the Gods above was once inflamed with a passion for
Ganymede, and something was found that Jupiter preferred to be, rather
than what he was. Yet into no bird does he vouchsafe to be transformed,
but that which can carry his bolts. 25 And no delay is there .
Striking the air with his fictitious wings, he carries off the youth of
Ilium; who even now mingles his cups for him , and, much against
the will of Juno, serves nectar to Jove .” EXPLANATION. The rape of Ganymede is probably based upon an actual occurrence, which
may be thus explained. Tros, the king of Troy, having conquered several
of his neighbours, as Eusebius, Cedrenus, and Suidas relate, sent his
son Ganymede into Lydia, accompanied by several of the nobles of his
court, to offer sacrifice in the temple dedicated to Jupiter; Tantalus,
the king of that country, who was ignorant of the designs of the Trojan
king, took his people for spies, and put Ganymede in prison. He having
been arrested in a temple of Jupiter, by order of a prince, whose ensign
was an eagle, it gave occasion for the report that he had been carried
off by Jupiter in the shape of an eagle. The reason why Jupiter is said to have made Ganymede his cup-bearer 352 x. 162-168. is difficult to conjecture, unless we suppose that he had served his
father, in that employment at the Trojan court. The poets say that he
was placed by the Gods among the Constellations, where he shines as
Aquarius, or the Water-bearer. The capture of Ganymede occasioned a protracted and bloody war between
Tros and Tantalus; and after their death, Ilus, the son of Tros,
continued it against Pelops, the son of Tantalus, and obliged him to
quit his kingdom and retire to the court of Œnomaüs, king of Pisa, whose
daughter he married, and by her had a son named Atreus, who was the
father of Agamemnon and Menelaüs. Thus we see that probably Paris, the
great grandson of Tros, carried off Helen, as a reprisal on Menelaüs,
the great grandson of Tantalus, the persecutor of Ganymede. Agamemnon
did not fail to turn this fact to his own advantage, by putting the
Greeks in mind of the evils which his family had suffered from the kings
of Troy. FABLE V. As Apollo is playing at quoits with the
youth Hyacinthus, one of them, thrown by the Divinity, rebounds from the
earth, and striking Hyacinthus on the head, kills him. From his blood
springs up the flower which still bears his name. “Phœbus would have placed thee too, descendant of Amycla, 26 in
the heavens, if the stern Fates had given him time to place thee there.
Still, so far as is possible, thou art immortal; and as oft as the
spring drives away the winter, and the Ram succeeds the watery Fish, so
often dost thou spring up and blossom upon the green turf. Thee, beyond all others, did my father love, and Delphi, situate in the 353 x. 168-192. middle 27 of the earth, was without its guardian Deity ,
while the God was frequenting the Eurotas, and the unfortified Sparta; 28 and neither his lyre nor his arrows were held in esteem by him . “Unmindful of his own dignity, he did not refuse to carry the nets,
or to hold the dogs, or to go, as his companion, over the ridges of the
rugged mountains; and by lengthened intimacy he augmented his flame. And
now Titan was almost in his mid course between the approaching and the
past night, and was at an equal distance from them both; when they stripped their bodies of their garments, and shone with the juice
of the oily olive, and engaged in the game of the broad quoit. 29 First, Phœbus tossed it, well poised, into the airy breeze, and clove
the opposite clouds with its weight. After a long pause, the heavy mass
fell on the hard ground, and showed skill united with strength.
Immediately the Tænarian youth, 30 in his thoughtlessness, and urged
on by eagerness for the sport, hastened to take up the circlet; but the
hard ground sent it back into the air with a rebound against thy face,
Hyacinthus. “Equally as pale as the youth does the Divinity himself turn; and he
bears up thy sinking limbs; and at one moment he cherishes thee, at
another, he stanches thy sad wound; and now he stops the fleeting
life by the application of herbs. His skill is of no avail. The wound is
incurable. As if, in a well-watered garden, any one should break down
violets, or poppies, and lilies, as they adhere to their yellow stalks;
drooping, they 354 x. 192-217. would suddenly hang down their languid heads, and could not support
themselves; and would look towards the ground with their tops. So sink
his dying features; and, forsaken by its vigour, the neck is a burden to
itself, and reclines upon the shoulder. ‘Son of Œbalus,’ says Phœbus,
‘thou fallest, deprived of thy early youth; and I look on thy wound as
my own condemnation. Thou art the object of my grief, and the
cause of my crime. With thy death is my right hand to be charged;
I am the author of thy destruction. Yet what is my fault? unless to
engage in sport can be termed a fault; unless it can be called a fault,
too, to have loved thee. And oh! that I could give my life for thee, or
together with thee; but since I am restrained by the decrees of destiny,
thou shalt ever be with me, and shalt dwell on my mindful lips. The lyre
struck with my hand, my songs, too, shall celebrate thee; and, becoming a new flower, by the inscription on thee , thou
shalt imitate 31 my lamentations. The time, too, shall come, at which
a most valiant hero 32 shall add his name to this flower, and
it shall be read upon the same leaves.’ “While such things are being uttered by the prophetic lips of Apollo,
behold! the blood which, poured on the ground, has stained the grass,
ceases to be blood, and a flower springs up, more bright than the Tyrian
purple, and it assumes the appearance which lilies have , were
there not in this a purple hue, and in them that of silver. This
was not enough for Phœbus, for ’twas he that was the author of this
honour. He himself inscribed his own lamentations on the leaves, and the
flower has ‘ai, ai,’ inscribed thereon ; and the mournful
characters 33 there are traced. Nor is Sparta ashamed to
have given birth 355 x. 217-219. to Hyacinthus; and his honours continue to the present time; the
Hyacinthian festival 34 returns, too, each year, to be celebrated
with the prescribed ceremonials, after the manner of former celebrations .” EXPLANATION. Hyacinthus, as Pausanias relates, was a youth of Laconia. His father
educated him with so much care, that he was looked upon as the favourite
of Apollo, and of the Muses. As he was one day playing with his
companions, he unfortunately received a blow on the head from a quoit,
from the effects of which he died soon after. Some funeral verses were
probably composed on the occasion; in which it was said, with the view
of comforting his relations, that Boreas, jealous of the affection which
Apollo had evinced for the youth, had turned aside the quoit with which
they played; and thus, by degrees, in length of time the name of Apollo
became inseparably connected with the story. The Lacedæmonians each year celebrated a solemn festival near his tomb,
where they offered sacrifices to him; and we are told by Athenæus, that
they instituted games in his honour, which were called after his name.
Pausanias makes mention of his tomb, upon which he says was engraved the
figure of Apollo. His alleged change into the flower of the same name is
probably solely owing to the similarity of their names. It is not very
clear what flower it is that was known to the ancients under the name of
Hyacinthus. Dioscorides believes it to be that called ‘vaccinium’ by the
Romans, which is 356 x. 220-240. of a purple colour, and on which can be traced, though imperfectly, the
letters αἰ (alas!) mentioned
by Ovid. The lamentations of Apollo, on the death of Hyacinthus, formed
the subject of bitter, and, indeed, deserved raillery, for several of
the satirical writers among the ancients. FABLE VI. Venus , incensed at the Cerastæ for
polluting the island of Cyprus, which is sacred to her, with the human
sacrifices which they offer to their Gods, transforms them into bulls;
and the Propœtides, as a punishment for their dissolute conduct, are
transformed into rocks. “But if, perchance, you were to ask of Amathus, 35 abounding in
metals, whether she would wish to have produced the Propœtides; she
would deny it, as well as those whose foreheads were of old rugged with
two horns, from which they also derived the name of Cerastæ. Before the
doors of these was standing an altar of Jupiter Hospes, 36 a scene of tragic horrors; if any stranger had seen it
stained with blood, he would have supposed that sucking calves had been
killed there, and Amathusian sheep; 37 strangers were slain there.
Genial Venus, offended at the wicked sacrifices there offered ,
was preparing to abandon her own cities and the Ophiusian lands. 38 ‘But how,’ said she, ‘have these delightful spots, how have my cities
offended? What criminality is there in them? Let the inhuman race rather
suffer punishment by exile or by death, or if there is any middle course
between death and exile; and what can that be, but the punishment of
changing their shape?’ “While she is hesitating into what she shall change them, she turns
her eyes towards their horns, and is put in mind that those may be left
to them; and then she transforms their huge limbs into those
of fierce bulls. “And yet the obscene Propœtides presumed to deny that Venus is a
Goddess; for which they are reported the first 357 x. 240-251. of all women to have prostituted their bodies, 39 with their
beauty, through the anger of the Goddess. And when their shame was gone,
and the blood of their face was hardened, they were, by a slight
transition, changed into hard rocks .” EXPLANATION. The Cerastæ, a people of the island of Cyprus, were, perhaps, said
to have been changed into bulls, to show the barbarous nature and rustic
manners of those islanders, who stained their altars with the blood of
strangers, in sacrifice to the Gods. An equivocation of names also, probably, aided in originating the story.
The island of Cyprus is surrounded with promontories which rise out of
the sea, and whose pointed rocks appear at a distance like horns, from
which it had the name of Cerastis, the Greek word κέρας , signifying a ‘horn.’ Thus, the inhabitants
having the name of Cerastæ, it was most easy to invent a fiction of
their having been once turned into oxen, to account the more readily for
their bearing that name. The Propœtides, who inhabited the same island, were females of very
dissolute character. Justin, and other writers, mention a singular and
horrible custom in that island, of prostituting young girls in the very
temple of Venus. It was most probably the utter disregard of these women
for common decency, that occasioned the poets to say that they were
transformed into rocks. FABLE VII. Pygmalion , shocked by the dissolute
lives of the Propœtides, throws off all fondness for the female sex, and
resolves on leading a life of perpetual celibacy. Falling in love with a
statue which he has made, Venus animates it; on which he marries this
new object of his affections, and has a son by her, who gives his name
to the island. “When Pygmalion saw these women spending their lives in criminal
pursuits, shocked at the vices which Nature had so plentifully
imparted to the female disposition, he lived a single life without a
wife, and for a long time was without a partner of his bed. In the
meantime, he ingeniously carved a statue of snow-white ivory
with wondrous skill; and gave it a beauty with which no woman can be
born; and then conceived a passion for his own workmanship. The
appearance was that of a real virgin, whom you might suppose to be
alive, and if 358 x. 251-282. modesty did not hinder her, to be desirous to move; so much did art lie
concealed under his skill. Pygmalion admires it; and entertains, within
his breast, a flame for this fictitious body. “Often does he apply his hands to the work, to try whether it is a human body, or whether it is ivory; and yet he does not own it to
be ivory. He gives it kisses, and fancies that they are returned, and
speaks to it, and takes hold of it, and thinks that his fingers make an
impression on the limbs which they touch, and is fearful lest a livid
mark should come on her limbs when pressed. And one while he
employs soft expressions, at another time he brings her presents that
are agreeable to maidens, such as shells, and smooth pebbles, and
little birds, and flowers of a thousand tints, and lilies, and painted
balls, and tears of the Heliades, that have fallen from the trees. He
decks her limbs, too, with clothing, and puts jewels on her fingers; he
puts, too , a long necklace on her neck. Smooth pendants hang
from her ears, and bows from her breast. 40 All things are
becoming to her ; and she does not seem less beautiful than when
naked. He places her on coverings dyed with the Sidonian shell, and
calls her the companion of his bed, and lays down her reclining neck
upon soft feathers, as though it were sensible. “A festival of Venus, much celebrated throughout all Cyprus, had now come; and heifers, with snow-white necks, having their
spreading horns tipped with gold, fell, struck by the axe .
Frankincense, too, was smoking, when, having made his offering,
Pygmalion stood before the altar, and timorously said, ‘If ye Gods can
grant all things, let my wife be, I pray,’ and he did not
dare to say ‘this ivory maid,’ but ‘like to this statue of
ivory.’ The golden Venus, as she herself was present at her own
festival, understood what that prayer meant; and as an omen of the
Divinity being favourable, thrice was the flame kindled up, and it sent
up a tapering flame into the air. Soon as he returned, he repaired to
the image of his maiden, and, lying along the couch, he gave her kisses.
She seems to grow warm. Again he applies his mouth; 359 x. 282-299. with his hands, too, he feels her breast. The pressed ivory becomes
soft, and losing its hardness, yields to the fingers, and gives way,
just as Hymettian wax 41 grows soft in the sun, and being worked with
the fingers is turned into many shapes, and becomes pliable by the very
handling. While he is amazed, and is rejoicing, though with
apprehension, and is fearing that he is deceived; the lover again and
again touches the object of his desires with his hand. It is a real body; the veins throb, when touched with the thumb. “Then, indeed, the Paphian hero conceives in his mind the most
lavish expressions, with which to give thanks to Venus, and at length
presses lips, no longer fictitious, with his own lips. The
maiden, too, feels the kisses given her, and blushes; and raising her
timorous eyes towards the light of day , she sees at once her
lover and the heavens. The Goddess was present at the marriage which she thus effected. And now, the horns of the moon having been nine
times gathered into a full orb, she brought forth Paphos; from whom the
island derived its name.” EXPLANATION. The Pygmalion here mentioned must not be mistaken for the person of the
same name, who was the brother of Dido, and king of Tyre. The story is
most probably an allegory, which was based on the fact that Pygmalion
being a man of virtuous principles, and disgusted with the vicious
conduct of the women of Cyprus, took a great deal of care in training
the mind and conduct of a young female, whom he kept at a distance from
the contact of the prevailing vices; and whom, after having recovered
her from the obdurate and rocky state to which the other females were
reduced, he made his wife, and had a son by her named Paphos; who was
said to have been the founder of the city of Cyprus, known by his
name. FABLE VIII. Myrrha , the daughter of Cinyras and
Cenchris, having conceived an incestuous passion for her own father, and
despairing of satisfying it, attempts to hang herself. Her nurse
surprises her in the act, and prevents her death. Myrrha, after repeated
entreaties and assurances of assistance, discloses to her the cause of
her despair. The nurse, by means of a stratagem, procures her the object
of her desires, which being discovered by her father, he pursues his
daughter with the intention of killing her. Myrrha flies from her
father’s dominions and being delivered of Adonis, is transformed into a
tree. “Of him was that Cinyras sprung, who, if he had been without 360 x. 299-327. issue, might have been reckoned among the happy. Of horrible events
shall I now sing. Daughters, be far hence; far hence be parents, too ; or, if my verse shall charm your minds, let credit not be
given to me in this part of my song , and do not believe that it
happened; or, if you will believe, believe as well in the punishment of
the deed. “Yet, if Nature allows this crime to appear to have been committed,
I congratulate the Ismarian matrons, and my own division of
the globe. I congratulate this land, that it is afar from those
regions which produced so great an abomination. Let the Panchæan land 42 be rich in amomum, and let it produce cinnamon, and
its zedoary, 43 and frankincense distilling from its tree, and its
other flowers, so long as it produces the myrrh-tree, as well. The new
tree was not of so much worth as to be a recompense for the crime to
which it owed its origin . Cupid himself denies, Myrrha, that it was
his arrows that injured thee; and he defends his torches from that
imputation; one of the three Sisters kindled this flame within
thee, with a Stygian firebrand and with swelling vipers. It is a crime
to hate a parent; but this love is a greater degree of wickedness
than hatred. On every side worthy nobles are desiring thee in
marriage , and throughout the whole East the youths come to the
contest for thy bed. Choose out of all these one for thyself, Myrrha, so
that, in all that number, there be not one person, namely, thy
father . “She, indeed, is sensible of her criminality , and struggles
hard against her infamous passion, and says to herself, ‘Whither am I
being carried away by my feelings? What am I attempting? I beseech
you, O ye Gods, and natural affection, and ye sacred ties of
parents, forbid this guilt: defend me from a crime so great! if, indeed,
this be a crime. But yet the ties of parent and child are said not to
forbid this kind of union; and other animals couple with no
distinction. It is not considered shameful for the heifer to mate with
her sire; his own daughter becomes the mate of the horse; the he-goat,
too, consorts 361 x. 327-358. with the flocks of which he is the father; and the bird conceives by
him, from whose seed she herself was conceived. Happy they, to whom
these things are allowed! The care of man has provided harsh laws, and
what Nature permits, malignant ordinances forbid. And yet there
are said to be nations 44 in which both the mother is united to the
son, and the daughter to the father, and natural affection is increased
by a twofold passion. Ah, wretched me! that it was not my chance to be
born there, and that I am injured by my lot being cast in
this place! but why do I ruminate on these things? Forbidden
hopes, begone! He is deserving to be beloved, but as a father only . Were I not, therefore, the daughter of the great Cinyras,
with Cinyras I might be united. Now, because he is so much mine, he is
not mine, and his very nearness of relationship is my
misfortune. “‘A stranger, I were more likely to succeed. I could wish to go
far away hence, and to leave my native country, so I might but escape this crime. A fatal delusion detains me thus in love;
that being present, I may look at Cinyras, and touch him, and talk
with him, and give him kisses, if nothing more is allowed me. But canst
thou hope for anything more, impious maid? and dost thou not perceive
both how many laws, and how many names thou art confounding? Wilt
thou be both the rival of thy mother, and the harlot of thy father? Wilt
thou be called the sister of thy son, and the mother of thy brother? and
wilt thou not dread the Sisters that have black snakes for their hair,
whom guilty minds see threatening their eyes and their faces with their
relentless torches? But do not thou conceive criminality in thy mind, so
long as thou hast suffered none in body, and violate not the laws of
all-powerful Nature by forbidden embraces. Suppose he were to be
compliant, the action itself forbids thee; but he is virtuous,
and regardful of what is right. And yet , O that there were a
like infatuation in him!’ “ Thus she says; but Cinyras, whom an honourable crowd of
suitors is causing to be in doubt what he is to do, inquires of herself,
as he repeats their names, of which husband she would 362 x. 358-389. wish to be the wife . At first she is silent; and, fixing her eyes
upon her father’s countenance, she is in confusion, and fills her eyes
with the warm tears. Cinyras, supposing this to be the effect of
virgin bashfulness, bids her not weep, and dries her cheeks, and gives
her kisses. On these being given, Myrrha is too much delighted; and,
being questioned what sort of a husband she would have, she says, ‘One
like thyself.’ But he praises the answer not really 45 understood by him, and says, ‘Ever be thus affectionate.’ On mention
being made of affection, the maiden, conscious of her guilt, fixed her
eyes on the ground. “It is now midnight, and sleep has dispelled the cares, and has eased the minds of mortals . But the virgin daughter of
Cinyras, kept awake, is preyed upon by an unconquerable flame, and
ruminates upon her wild desires. And one while she despairs, and at
another she resolves to try; and is both ashamed, and yet is
desirous, and is not certain what she is to do; and, just as a huge
tree, wounded by the axe, when the last stroke now remains, is in
doubt, as it were , on which side it is to fall, and is dreaded in
each direction; so does her mind, shaken by varying passions, waver in
uncertainty, this way and that, and receives an impulse in either
direction; and no limit or repose is found for her love, but
death: ’tis death that pleases her. She raises herself upright, and
determines to insert her neck 46 in a halter; and tying her girdle
to the top of the door-post, she says, ‘Farewell, dear Cinyras, and
understand the cause of my death;’ and then fits the noose to her
pale neck. “They say that the sound of her words reached the attentive ears of
her nurse, 47 as she was guarding the door of her foster-child. The old woman rises,
and opens the door; and, seeing the instruments of the death she has
contemplated, at the same moment she cries aloud, and smites herself,
and rends her bosom, and snatching the girdle from her neck, tears it to
pieces. And then, at last, she has time to weep, then to give her
embraces, and to inquire into the occasion for the halter. The maid is
silent, as 363 x. 389-422. though dumb, and, without moving, looks upon the earth; and thus detected, is sorry for her attempt at death in this slow
manner. The old woman still urges her; and laying bare her grey
hair, and her withered breasts, begs her, by her cradle and by her first
nourishment, to entrust her with that which is causing her grief. She,
turning from her as she asks, heaves a sigh. The nurse is determined to
find it out, and not to promise her fidelity only. ‘Tell me,’ says she,
‘and allow me to give thee assistance; my old age is not an inactive
one. If it is a frantic passion, I have the means of curing it with
charms and herbs; if any one has hurt thee by spells, by magic rites
shalt thou be cured; or if it is the anger of the Gods, that anger can
be appeased by sacrifice. What more than these can I think of? No
doubt thy fortunes and thy family are prosperous, and in the way of
continuing so; thy mother and thy father are still surviving.’
Myrrha, on hearing her father’s name , heaves a sigh from the
bottom of her heart. Nor, even yet, does her nurse apprehend in her mind
any unlawful passion; and still she has a presentiment that it is
something connected with love. Persisting in her purpose, she
entreats her, whatever it is, to disclose it to her, and takes her, as
she weeps, in her aged lap; and so embracing her in her feeble arms, she
says, ‘Daughter, I understand it; thou art in love, and in this
case (lay aside thy fears) my assiduity will be of service to thee; nor
shall thy father ever be aware of it.’ “Furious, she sprang away from her bosom; and pressing the bed with
her face, she said, ‘Depart, I entreat thee, and spare my wretched
shame.’ Upon the other insisting, she said, ‘Either depart, or cease to
inquire why it is I grieve; that which thou art striving to know, is
impious.’ The old woman is struck with horror, and stretches forth her
hands palsied both with years and with fear, and suppliantly falls
before the feet of her foster-child. And one while she soothes her,
sometimes she terrifies her with the consequences , if she is not
made acquainted with it; and then she threatens her with the
discovery of the halter, and of her attempted destruction, and
promises her good offices, if the passion is confided to her. She lifts
up her head, and fills the breast of her nurse with tears bursting
forth; and often endeavouring to confess, as often does she check her
voice; and she covers her blushing face with her garments, and says, ‘O,
mother, happy in thy husband!’ 364 x. 423-434. Thus much she says ; and then she sighs. A trembling
shoots through the chilled limbs and the bones of her nurse, for she
understands her; and her white hoariness stands bristling with stiff
hair all over her head; and she adds many a word to drive away a passion
so dreadful, if only she can. But the maiden is well aware that
she is not advised to a false step; still she is resolved to die, if she
does not enjoy him whom she loves. ‘Live then ,’ says the
nurse , ‘thou shalt enjoy thy——’ and, not daring to say
‘parent,’ she is silent; and then she confirms her promise with
an oath. “The pious matrons were now celebrating the annual festival of
Ceres, 48 on which, having their bodies clothed with
snow-white robes, they offer garlands made of ears of corn, as the first
fruits of the harvest; and for nine nights 365 x. 434-464. they reckon embraces, and the contact of a husband, among the things
forbidden. Cenchreïs, the king’s wife, is absent in that company, and
attends the mysterious rites. Therefore, while his bed is without his
lawful wife, the nurse, wickedly industrious, having found Cinyras
overcome with wine, discloses to him a real passion, but under a
feigned name, and praises the beauty of the damsel . On his
enquiring the age of the maiden, she says, ‘She is of the same age as
Myrrha.’ After she is commanded to bring her, and as soon as she has
returned home, she says, ‘Rejoice, my fosterling, we have prevailed.’
The unhappy maid does not feel joy throughout her entire body, and her
boding breast is sad. And still she does rejoice: so great is the
discord in her mind. “’Twas the time when all things are silent, and Boötes had turned his
wain with the pole obliquely directed among the Triones. 49 She
approaches to perpetrate her enormity. The golden moon flies from
the heavens; black clouds conceal the hiding stars; the night is
deprived of its fires. Thou, Icarus, dost conceal thy rising
countenance; and thou , Erigone, raised to the heavens through thy
affectionate love for thy father. Three times was she recalled by the
presage of her foot stumbling; thrice did the funereal owl give an omen
by its dismal cry. Yet onward she goes, and the gloom and the
dark night lessen her shame. In her left hand she holds that of her
nurse, the other, by groping, explores the secret road. And now
she is arrived at the door of the chamber; and now she opens the door;
now she is led in; but her knees tremble beneath her sinking hams, her
colour and her blood vanish; and her courage deserts her as she moves
along. The nearer she is to the commission of her crime, the more
she dreads it, and she repents of her attempt, and could wish to be able
to return unknown. The old woman leads her on by the hand as she
lingers, and when she has delivered her up on her approach to the lofty
bed, she says, ‘Take her, Cinyras, she is thy 366 x. 464-496. own,’ and so unites their doomed bodies. The father receives his
own bowels into the polluted bed, and allays her virgin fears, and
encourages her as she trembles. Perhaps, too, he may have called her by
a name suited to her age, and she may have called him ‘father,’
that the appropriate names might not be wanting in this deed of
horror. Pregnant by her father, she departs from the chamber, and, in
her impiety, bears his seed in her incestuous womb, and carries with
her , criminality in her conception. The ensuing night repeats the
guilty deed; nor on that night is there an end. At last, Cinyras,
after so many embraces, longing to know who is his paramour, on lights
being brought in, discovers both the crime and his own daughter. “His words checked through grief, he draws his shining sword from the
scabbard as it hangs. Myrrha flies, rescued from death by the gloom and
the favour of a dark night; and wandering along the wide fields, she
leaves the Arabians famed for their palms, and the Panchæan fields. And
she wanders during nine horns of the returning moon; when, at length,
being weary, she rests in the Sabæan country, 50 and with
difficulty she supports the burden of her womb. Then, uncertain what to
wish, and between the fear of death and weariness of life, she uttered
such a prayer as this : ‘O ye Deities, if any of you favour those
who are penitent; I have deserved severe punishment, and I do not
shrink from it. But that, neither existing, I may pollute the
living, nor dead, those who are departed, expel me from both these
realms; and transforming me, deny me both life and death.’ Some Divinity ever regards the penitent; at least, the last of her
prayers found its Gods to execute it . For the earth closes over
her legs as she speaks, and a root shoots forth obliquely through her
bursting nails, as a firm support to her tall trunk. Her bones,
too, become hard wood, and her marrow continuing in the middle, her
blood changes into sap, her arms into great branches, her fingers into
smaller ones; her skin grows hard with bark. And now the growing tree
has run over her heavy womb, and has covered her breast, and 367 x. 496-518. is ready to enclose her neck. She cannot endure delay, and sinks down to
meet the approaching wood, and hides her features within the bark.
Though she has lost her former senses together with her human shape, she still weeps on, and warm drops distil 51 from the tree.
There is a value even in her tears, and the myrrh distilling from the
bark, retains the name of its mistress, and will be unheard-of in no future age. “But the infant conceived in guilt grows beneath the wood, and seeks
out a passage, by which he may extricate himself, having left his
mother. Her pregnant womb swells in the middle of the tree. The burden
distends the mother, nor have her pangs words of their own whereby to
express themselves ; nor can Lucina be invoked by her voice while bringing forth. Yet she is like one struggling to be
delivered ; and the bending tree utters frequent groans, and is
moistened with falling tears. Gentle Lucina stands by the moaning
boughs, and applies her hands, and utters words that promote delivery.
The tree gapes open, in chinks, and through the cleft bark it discharges
the living burden. The child cries; the Naiads, laying him on the soft
grass, anoint him with the tears of his mother. “Even Envy herself would have commended his face; for just as
the bodies of naked Cupids are painted in a picture, such was he. But
that their dress may not make any difference, either give to him or take
away from them, the polished quivers .” EXPLANATION. Le Clerc, forming his ideas on what Lucian, Phurnutus, and other authors
have said on the subject, explains the story of Cinyras and Myrrha in
the following manner. Cynnor, or Cinyras, the grandfather of Adonis,
having one day drank to excess, fell asleep in a posture which violated
the rules of decency. Mor, or Myrrha, his daughter-in-law, the wife of
Ammon, together with her son Adonis, seeing him in that condition,
acquainted her husband with her father’s lapse. On his repeating this to
Cinyras, the latter was so full of indignation, that he loaded Myrrha
and Adonis with imprecations. Loaded with the execrations of her father, Myrrha retired into Arabia,
where she remained some time; and because Adonis passed some portion 368 x. 519-525. of his youth there, the poets feigned that Myrrha was delivered of him
in that country. Her transformation into a tree was only invented on
account of the equivocal character of her name, ‘Mor,’ which meant in
the Arabic language ‘Myrrh.’ It is very probable that the story was
founded on a tradition among the Phœnicians of the history of Noah, and
of the malediction which Ham drew on himself by his undutiful conduct
towards his father. FABLE IX . Adonis is educated by the Naiads. His
beauty makes a strong impression on the Goddess Venus, and, in her
passion, she traverses the same wilds in pursuit of the youth, which his
mother did, when flying from the wrath of her father. After chasing the
wild beasts, she invites Adonis to a poplar shade, where she warns him
of his danger in hunting lions, wild boars, and such formidable animals.
On this occasion, too, she relates the adventures of Hippomenes and
Atalanta. The beauty of the latter was such, that her charms daily
attracted crowds of suitors. Having consulted the oracle, whether she
shall marry, she is answered that a husband will certainly prove her
destruction. On this, to avoid marrying, she makes it a rule to offer to
run with her suitors, promising that she herself will be the prize of
the victor, but only on condition that immediate death shall be the fate
of those who are vanquished by her. As she excels in running, her design
succeeds, and several suitors die in the attempt to win her. Hippomenes,
smitten with her charms, is not daunted at their ill success; but boldly
enters the lists, after imploring the aid of Venus. Atalanta is struck
with his beauty, and is much embarrassed, whether she shall yield to the
charms of the youth, or to the dissuasions of the oracle. Hippomenes
attracts her attention in the race, by throwing down some golden apples
which Venus has given him, and then, reaching the goal before her, he
carries off the reward of victory. Venus, to punish his subsequent
ingratitude towards her, raises his desires to such a pitch, that he
incurs the resentment of Cybele, by defiling her shrine with the
embraces of his mistress; on which they are both transformed into lions,
and thenceforth draw the chariot of the Goddess. “Winged time glides on insensibly and deceives us; and there is
nothing more fleeting than years. He, born of his own sister and of his
grandfather, who, so lately enclosed in a tree, was so lately born, and
but just now a most beauteous infant, is now a youth, now a man, and now more beauteous than he was before . And now
he pleases even Venus, 52 and revenges the flames of his mother, kindled by her . For, while the boy that wears the quiver is
giving kisses to his mother, he 369 x. 526-556. unconsciously grazes her breast with a protruding arrow. The Goddess,
wounded, pushed away her son with her hand. The wound was inflicted more
deeply than it seemed to be, and at first had deceived even herself. Charmed with the beauty of the youth, she does not now care for
the Cytherian shores, nor does she revisit Paphos, surrounded with the
deep sea, and Cnidos, 53 abounding in fish, or Amathus, rich in
metals. “She abandons even the skies; him she ever attends; and she
who has been always accustomed to indulge in the shade, and to improve
her beauty, by taking care of it, wanders over the tops of mountains,
through the woods, and over bushy rocks, bare to the knee and with her
robes tucked up after the manner of Diana, and she cheers on the dogs,
and hunts animals that are harmless prey, either the fleet hares, or the
stag with its lofty horns, or the hinds; she keeps afar from the fierce
boars, and avoids the ravening wolves, and the bears armed with claws,
and the lions glutted with the slaughter of the herds. Thee, too,
Adonis, she counsels to fear them, if she can aught avail by advising
thee. And she says, “Be brave against those animals that fly;
boldness is not safe against those that are bold. Forbear, youth, to be
rash at my hazard, and attack not the wild beasts to which nature has
granted arms, lest thy thirst for glory should cost me dear.
Neither thy age, nor thy beauty, nor other things which have made
an impression on Venus, make any impression on lions and bristly boars,
and the eyes and the tempers of wild beasts. The fierce boars carry
lightning 54 in their curving tusks; there is rage and fury
unlimited in the tawny lions; and the whole race is odious
to me.” “Upon his asking, what is the reason, she says, ‘I will tell thee,
and thou wilt be surprised at the prodigious result of a fault long
since committed. But this toil to which I am unaccustomed has now
fatigued me, and see! a convenient poplar invites us, by its shade,
and the turf furnishes a couch. Here I am desirous to repose myself,
together with 370 x. 556-592. thee;’ and forthwith she rests herself on the ground, and presses
at once the grass and himself. And with her neck reclining on the bosom
of the youth, smiling, she thus says, and she mingles kisses in the
midst of her words:— “Perhaps thou mayst have heard how a certain damsel excelled the
swiftest men in the contest of speed. That report was no idle tale; for
she did excel them. Nor couldst thou have said, whether she was more
distinguished in the merit of her swiftness, or in the excellence of her
beauty. Upon her consulting the oracle about a husband, the God said to
her, ‘Thou hast no need, Atalanta, of a husband; avoid obtaining a
husband. And yet thou wilt not avoid it, and, while still living,
thou wilt lose thyself.’ Alarmed with the response of the God, she lives
a single life in the shady woods, and determinedly repulses the pressing
multitude of her suitors with these conditions. ‘I am not,’ says she,
‘to be gained, unless first surpassed in speed. Engage with me in
running. Both a wife and a wedding shall be given as the reward of the
swift; death shall be the recompense of the slow. Let that be the
condition of the contest.’ She, indeed, was cruel in this
proposal ; but (so great is the power of beauty) a rash
multitude of suitors agreed to these terms. Hippomenes had sat, as a
spectator, of this unreasonable race, and said, ‘Is a wife sought by any
one, amid dangers so great?’ And thus he condemned the excessive
ardour of the youths. But when he beheld her face, and her body
with her clothes laid aside, such as mine is, or such as thine would be, Adonis , if thou wast to become a woman, he was astonished, and
raising his hands, he said, ‘Pardon me, ye whom I was just now
censuring; the reward which you contended for was not yet known to
me.’ “In commending her, he kindles the flame, and wishes that none of the
young men may run more swiftly than she, and, in his envy, is
apprehensive of it. ‘But why,’ says he, ‘is my chance in this contest
left untried? The Divinity himself assists the daring.’ While Hippomenes
is pondering such things within himself, the virgin flies with winged
pace. Although she appears to the Aonian youth to go no less swiftly
than the Scythian arrow, he admires her still more in her beauty, and
the very speed makes her beauteous. The breeze that meets her bears back
her pinions on her swift feet, and 371 x. 592-606. her hair is thrown over her ivory shoulders and the leggings which are
below her knees with their variegated border, and upon her virgin
whiteness her body has contracted a blush; no otherwise than as when
purple hangings 55 over a whitened hall tint it with a shade of a
similar colour. While the stranger is observing these things, the last
course is run, 56 and the victorious Atalanta is adorned with a
festive crown. The vanquished utter sighs, and pay the penalty,
according to the stipulation. Still, not awed by the end of these young
men, he stands up in the midst; and fixing his eyes on the maiden, he
says, ‘Why dost thou seek an easy victory by conquering the inactive?
Contend now with me. If fortune shall render me victorious, thou
wilt not take it ill to be conquered by one so illustrious. For my
father was Megareus, Onchestius his; 57 Neptune was his grandsire;
I am 372 x. 606-636. the great grandson of the king of the waves. Nor is my merit inferior to
my extraction. Or if I shall be conquered, in the conquest of Hippomenes
thou wilt have a great and honourable name.’ “As he utters such words as these, the daughter of Schœneus regards
him with a benign countenance, and is in doubt whether she shall wish to
be overcome or to conquer; and thus she says: ‘What Deity, a foe to
the beauteous, wishes to undo this youth ? and commands him, at
the risk of a life so dear, to seek this alliance? In my own
opinion, I am not of so great value. Nor yet am I moved by
his beauty. Still, by this, too, I could be moved. But, ’tis because he is still a boy; ’tis not himself that affects me, but his
age. And is it not, too, because he has courage and a mind undismayed by
death? And is it not, besides, because he is reckoned fourth in descent
from the monarch of the sea? And is it not, because he loves me,
and thinks a marriage with me of so much worth as to perish for
it , if cruel fortune should deny me to him? Stranger, while still thou mayst, begone, and abandon an alliance stained with
blood. A match with me is cruelly hazardous. No woman will be
unwilling to be married to thee; and thou mayst be desired even by a prudent maid. But why have I any concern for thee, when so many
have already perished? Let him look to it; and let him die, since
he is not warned by the fate of so many of my wooers, and is impelled
onwards to weariness of life. “‘Shall he then die because he was desirous with me to live? And
shall he suffer an undeserved death, the reward of his love? My victory
will not be able to support the odium of the deed . But it is no
fault of mine. I wish thou wouldst desist! or since thou art thus mad, would that thou wast more fleet than I! But what
a feminine look 58 there is in his youthful face! Ah, wretched
Hippomenes, I would that I had not been seen by thee! Thou wast
worthy to have lived! And if I had been more fortunate; and if the
vexatious Divinities had not denied me the blessings of marriage,
thou wast one with whom I could have shared my bed.’ Thus she said; and
as one inexperienced, and smitten by Cupid for the first 373 x. 636-669. time, not knowing what she is doing, she is in love, and yet does
not know that she is in love. “ And now, both the people and her father, demanded the usual
race, when Hippomenes, the descendant of Neptune, invoked me with
anxious voice; ‘I entreat that Cytherea may favour my undertaking, and
aid the passion that she has inspired in me .’ The breeze, not
envious, wafted to me this tender prayer; I was moved,
I confess it; nor was any long delay made in giving aid.
There is a field, the natives call it by name the Tamasenian field , 59 the choicest spot in the Cyprian land; this the
elders of former days consecrated to me, and ordered to be added as an
endowment for my temple. In the middle of this field a tree flourishes,
with yellow foliage, and with branches tinkling with yellow gold.
Hence, by chance as I was coming, I carried three golden apples,
that I had plucked, in my hand; and being visible to none but him,
I approached Hippomenes, and I showed him what was to be the
use of them. The trumpets have now given the signal, when each of them darts precipitately from the starting place, and skims
the surface of the sand with nimble feet. You might have thought them
able to pace the sea with dry feet, and to run along the ears of white
standing corn while erect. The shouts and the applause of the
populace give courage to the youth, and the words of those who exclaim,
‘Now, now, Hippomenes, is the moment to speed onward! make haste. Now
use all thy strength! Away with delay! thou shalt be conqueror.’ It is
doubtful whether the Megarean hero, or the virgin daughter of Schœneus
rejoiced the most at these sayings. O how often when she could have
passed by him, did she slacken her speed, and then unwillingly
left behind the features that long she had gazed upon. “A parched panting is coming from his faint mouth, and the goal is still a great way off. Then, at length, the descendant of Neptune
throws one of the three products of the tree. The virgin is amazed, and
from a desire for the shining fruit, she turns from her course, and
picks up the rolling gold. Hippomenes passes her. The theatres ring 60 with applause. She 374 x. 669-701. makes amends for her delay, and the time that she has lost, with a swift
pace, and again she leaves the youth behind. And, retarded by the
throwing of a second apple, again she overtakes the young man,
and passes by him. The last part of the race now remained.
‘ And now,’ said he, ‘O Goddess, giver of this present, aid me;’
and then with youthful might, he threw the shining gold, in an
oblique direction, on one side of the plain, in order that she might
return the more slowly. The maiden seemed to be in doubt, whether she
should fetch it; I forced her to take it up, and added weight to
the apple, when she had taken it up, and I impeded her, both by the
heaviness of the burden, and the delay in reaching it. And that my
narrative may not be more tedious than that race, the virgin was outrun,
and the conqueror obtained the prize. “And was I not, Adonis, deserving that he should return thanks to me,
and the tribute of frankincense? but, in his ingratitude, he gave me
neither thanks nor frankincense. I was thrown into a sudden
passion; and provoked at being slighted, I provided by making an example, that I should not be despised in future times,
and I aroused myself against them both. They were passing by a temple,
concealed within a shady wood, which the famous Echion had formerly
built for the Mother of the Gods, according to his vow; and the length
of their journey moved them to take rest there . There, an
unseasonable desire of caressing his wife seized Hippomenes,
excited by my agency. Near the temple was a recess, with but little light, like a cave, covered with native pumice stone, one sacred from ancient religious observance; where the priest had conveyed
many a wooden image of the ancient Gods. This he entered, and he defiled
the sanctuary by a forbidden crime. The sacred images turned away their
eyes, and the Mother of the Gods , crowned with turrets, 61 was
in doubt whether she should plunge these guilty ones in the Stygian
stream. That seemed too light a punishment. Wherefore yellow
manes cover their necks so lately smooth; their fingers are bent into
claws, of their shoulders are made fore-legs; 62 their whole weight
passes 375 x. 701-707. into their breasts. The surface of the sand is swept by their tails. 63 Their look has anger in it ; instead of words
they utter growls; instead of chambers they haunt the woods; and
dreadful to others, as lions, they champ the bits of Cybele with
subdued jaws. Do thou, beloved by me, avoid these, and together with
these, all kinds of wild beasts which turn not their backs in flight,
but their breasts to the fight; lest thy courage should be fatal to us
both.” EXPLANATION. The Atalanta who is mentioned in this story was the daughter of
Schœneus, and the granddaughter of Athamas, whose misfortunes obliged
him to retire into Bœotia, where he built a little town, which was
called after his name, as we learn from Pausanias and Eustathius. Ovid
omits to say that it was one of the conditions of the agreement, that
the lover was to have the start in the race. According to some writers,
the golden apples were from the gardens of the Hesperides; while,
according to others, they were plucked by Venus in the isle of Cyprus.
The story seems to be founded merely on the fact, that Hippomenes
contrived by means of bribes to find the way to the favour of his
mistress. Apollodorus, however, relates the story in a different manner; he says
that the father of Atalanta desiring to have sons, but no daughters,
exposed her, on her birth, in a desert, that she might perish.
A she-bear found the infant, and nourished it, until it was
discovered by some hunters. As the damsel grew up, she made hunting her
favourite pursuit, and slew two Centaurs, who offered her violence, with
her arrows. On her parents pressing her to marry, she consented to be
the wife of that man only who could outrun her, on condition that those
who were conquered by her in the race should be put to death. Several of
her suitors having failed in the attempt, one of the name of Melanion,
by using a similar stratagem to that attributed by Ovid to Hippomenes,
conquered her in the race, and became her husband. Having profaned the
temple of Jupiter, they were transformed, Melanion into a lion, and
Atalanta into a lioness. According to Apollodorus, her father’s name was
Iasius, though in his first book he says she was the daughter of
Schœneus. He also says that she was the same person that was present at
the hunt of the Calydonian boar, though other writers represent them to
have been different personages. Euripides makes Mænalus to have been the
name of her father. Atalanta had by Melanion, or, as some authors say, by Mars, a son
named Parthenopæus, who was present at the Theban war. Ælian gives a
long account of her history, which does not very much differ from the
narrative of Apollodorus. 376 x. 708-738. FABLE X. Adonis being too ardent in the pursuit
of a wild boar, the beast kills him, on which Venus changes his blood
into a flower of crimson colour. “She, indeed, thus warned him; and, harnessing her swans,
winged her way through the air; but his courage stood in opposition to
her advice. By chance, his dogs having followed its sure track, roused a
boar, and the son of Cinyras pierced him, endeavouring to escape from
the wood, with a wound from the side. Immediately the fierce boar, with
his crooked snout, struck out the hunting-spear, stained with his blood,
and then pursued him, trembling and seeking a safe retreat, and
lodged his entire tusks in his groin, and stretched him expiring on the
yellow sand. “Cytherea, borne in her light chariot 64 through the middle
of the air, had not yet arrived at Cyprus upon the wings of her swans.
She recognized afar his groans, as he was dying, and turned her white
birds in that direction. And when, from the lofty sky, she beheld him
half dead, and bathing his body in his own blood, she rapidly descended,
and rent both her garments and her hair, and she smote her breast with
her distracted hands. And complaining of the Fates, she says, ‘But,
however, all things shall not be in your power; the memorials of my
sorrow, Adonis, shall ever remain; and the representation of thy death,
repeated yearly, shall exhibit an imitation of my mourning. But thy
blood shall be changed into a flower. Was it formerly allowed thee,
Persephone, to change the limbs 65 of a female into fragrant mint;
and shall the hero, the son of Cinyras, if changed, be a cause of
displeasure against me?’ Having thus said, she sprinkles his blood with
odoriferous nectar, which, touched by it, effervesces, just as the
transparent bubbles are wont to rise in rainy weather. Nor was there a
pause longer than a full hour, when a flower sprang up from the blood,
of the same colour with it , such as 377 x. 736-739. the pomegranates are wont to bear, which conceal their seeds beneath
their tough rind. Yet the enjoyment of it is but short-lived; for the
same winds 66 which give it a name, beat it down, as it has but a
slender hold, and is apt to fall by reason of its extreme
slenderness.” EXPLANATION. Theocritus, Bion, Hyginus, and Antoninus Liberalis, beside several other
authors, relate the history of the loves of Venus and Adonis. They
inform us of many particulars which Ovid has here neglected to remark.
They say that Mars, jealous of the passion which Venus had for Adonis,
implored the aid of Diana, who, to gratify his revenge, sent the boar
that destroyed the youth. According to some writers, it was Apollo
himself that took the form of that animal; and they say that Adonis
descending to the Infernal Regions, Proserpine fell in love with him,
and refused to allow him to return, notwithstanding the orders of
Jupiter. On this, the king of heaven fearing to displease both the
Goddesses, referred the dispute to the Muse Calliope, who directed that
Adonis should pass one half of his time with Venus on earth, and the
other half in the Infernal Regions. They also tell us that it took up a
year before the dispute could be determined, and that the Hours brought
Adonis at last to the upper world, on which, Venus being dissatisfied
with the decision of Calliope, instigated the women of Thrace to kill
her son Orpheus. The mythologists have considered this story to be based on grounds
either historical or physical. Cicero, in his Discourse on the Nature of
the Gods, says, that there were several persons who had the name of
Venus, and that the fourth, surnamed Astarte, was a Syrian, who married
Adonis, the son of Cinyras, king of Cyprus. Hunting in the forests of
Mount Libanus, or Lebanon, he was wounded in the groin by a wild boar,
which accident ultimately caused his death. Astarte caused the city of
Byblos and all Syria to mourn for his loss; and, to keep his name and
his sad fate in remembrance, established feasts in his honour, to be
celebrated each year. Going still further, if we suppose the story to
have originated in historical facts, it seems not improbable that Adonis
did not die of his wound, and that, contrary to all expectation, he was
cured; as the Syrians, after having mourned for several days during his
festival, rejoiced as though he had been raised from the dead, at a
second festival called ‘The Return.’ The worship both of Venus and
Adonis probably originated in Syria, and was spread through Asia Minor
into Greece; while the Carthaginians, a Phœnician colony introduced
it into Sicily. The festival of Adonis is most amusingly described by
Theocritus the Sicilian poet, in his ‘Adoniazusæ.’ Some authors have
suggested that Adonis was the same with the Egyptian God Osiris, and
that the affliction 378 of Venus represented that of Isis at the death of her husband. According
to Hesiod, Adonis was the son of Phœnix and Alphesibœa, while Panyasis
says that he was son of Theias, the king of the Assyrians. In support of the view which some commentators take of the story of
Adonis having been founded on physical circumstance, we cannot do better
than quote the able remarks of Mr. Keightley on the subject. He says
(Mythology of Ancient Greece and Italy, p. 109)— “The tale of
Adonis is apparently an Eastern mythus. His very name is Semitic (Hebrew
‘Adon,’ ‘Lord’), and those of his parents also refer to that part of the
world. He appears to be the same with the Thammuz, mentioned by the
prophet Ezekiel, and to be a Phœnician personification of the sun who,
during a part of the year is absent, or, as the legend expresses it,
with the Goddess of the under world: during the remainder with Astarte,
the regent of heaven. It is uncertain when the Adonia were first
celebrated in Greece; but we find Plato alluding to the gardens of
Adonis, as boxes of flowers used in them were called; and the ill
fortune of the Athenian expedition to Sicily was in part ascribed to the
circumstance of the fleet having sailed during that festival .” This notion of the mourning for Adonis being a testimony of grief for the
absence of the Sun during the winter, is not, however, to be too readily
acquiesced in. Lobeck (Aglaophamus, p. 691), for example, asks,
with some appearance of reason, why those nations whose heaven was
mildest, and their winter shortest, should so bitterly bewail the
regular changes of the seasons, as to feign that the Gods themselves
were carried off or slain; and he shrewdly observes, that, in that case,
the mournful and the joyful parts of the festival should have been held
at different times of the year, and not joined together, as they were.
He further inquires, whether the ancient writers, who esteemed these
Gods to be so little superior to men, may not have believed them to have
been really and not metaphorically put to death? And, in truth, it is
not easy to give a satisfactory answer to these questions. 1. Saffron-coloured. ]—Ver. 1. This was in order to be dressed
in a colour similar to that of the ‘flammeum,’ which was a veil of a
bright yellow colour, worn by the bride. This custom prevailed among the
Romans, among whom the shoes worn by the bride were of the same colour
with the veil. 2. Ciconians. ]—Ver. 2. These were a people of Thrace, near the
river Hebrus and the Bistonian Lake. 3. Laying aside. ]—Ver. 19. ‘Falsi positis ambagibus oris,’ is
rendered by Clarke, ‘Laying aside all the long-winded fetches of a false
tongue.’ 4. The three necks. ]—Ver. 65. There was a story among the
ancients, that when Cerberus was dragged by Hercules from the Infernal
Regions, a certain man, through fear of Hercules, hid himself in a
cave; and that on peeping out, and beholding Cerberus, he was changed
into a stone by his fright. Suidas says, that in his time the stone was
still to be seen, and that the story gave rise to a proverb. 5. Olenus. ]—Ver. 69. Olenus, who was supposed to be the son of
Vulcan, had a beautiful wife, whose name was Lethæa. When about to be
punished for comparing her own beauty to that of the Goddesses, Olenus
offered to submit to the penalty in her stead, on which they were both
changed into stones. 6. In squalid guise. ]—Ver. 74. ‘Squallidus in
ripa—sedit,’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘He sat in a sorry pickle on
the bank.’ 7. Erebus. ]—Ver. 76. Erebus was the son of Chaos and Darkness;
but his name is often used to signify the Infernal Regions. 8. Hæmus. ]—Ver. 77. This was a mountain of Thrace, which was
much exposed to the North winds. 9. Fishes of the ocean. ]—Ver. 78. ‘Pisces,’ ‘the Fishes,’
being the last sign of the Zodiac, when the sun has passed through it,
the year is completed. 10. Tree of Chaonia. ]—Ver. 90. This was the oak, for the growth
of which Chaonia, a province of Epirus, was famous. 11. Grove of the Heliades. ]—Ver. 91. He alludes to the poplars,
into which tree, as we have already seen, the Heliades, or daughters of
the sun, were changed after the death of Phaëton. 12. Virgin laurel. ]—Ver. 92. The laurel is so styled from the
Virgin Daphne, who refused to listen to the solicitations of Apollo. 13. Genial plane-tree. ]—Ver. 95. The plane tree was much valued
by the ancients, as affording, by its extending branches,
a pleasant shade to festive parties. Virgil says, in the Fourth
Book of the Georgics, line 146, ‘Atque ministrantem platanum potantibus
umbram,’ ‘And the plane-tree that gives its shade for those that
carouse.’ 14. Parti-coloured maple. ]—Ver. 95. The grain of the maple
being of a varying colour, it was much valued by the ancients, for the
purpose of making articles of furniture. 15. The tine tree. ]—Ver. 98. The ‘tinus,’ or ‘tine tree,’
according to Pliny the Elder, was a wild laurel, with green berries. 16. The bending palm. ]—Ver. 102. The branches of the palm were
remarkable for their flexibility, while no superincumbent weight could
break them. On this account they were considered as emblematical of
victory. 17. Tufted foliage. ]—Ver. 103. The pine is called ‘succincta,’
because it sends forth its branches from the top, and not from the
sides. 18. Resembling the cone. ]—Ver. 106. In the Roman Circus for the
chariot races, a low wall ran lengthways down the course, which,
from its resemblance in position to the spinal bone, was called by the
name of ‘spina.’ At each extremity of this ‘spina,’ there were placed
upon a base, three large cones, or pyramids of wood, in shape very much
like cypress trees, to which fact allusion is here made. They were
called ‘metæ,’ ‘goals.’ 19. Studded with gems. ]—Ver. 113. Necklaces were much worn in
ancient times by the Indians, Persians, and Egyptians. They were more
especially used by the Greek and Roman females as bridal ornaments. The
‘monile baccatum,’ or ‘bead necklace,’ was the most common, being made
of berries, glass, or other materials, strung together. They were so
strung with thread, silk, or wire, and links of gold. Emeralds seem to
have been much used for this purpose, and amber was also similarly
employed. Thus Ovid says, in the second Book of the Metamorphoses, line
366, that the amber distilled from the trees, into which the sisters of
Phaëton were changed, was sent to be worn by the Latian matrons. Horses
and favourite animals, as in the present instance, were decked with
‘monilia,’ or necklaces. 20. A silver ball. ]—Ver. 114. The ‘bulla’ was a ball of metal,
so called from its resemblance in shape to a bubble of water. These were
especially worn by the Roman children, suspended from the neck, and were
mostly made of thin plates of gold, being of about the size of a walnut.
The use of these ornaments was derived from the people of Etruria; and
though originally worn only by the children of the Patricians, they were
subsequently used by all of free birth. The children of the Libertini,
or ‘freedmen,’ indeed wore ‘bullæ,’ but they were only made of leather.
The ‘bulla’ was laid aside at the same time as the ‘toga prætexta,’ and
was on that occasion consecrated to the Lares. The bulls of the Popes of
Rome, received their names from this word; the ornament which was
pendent from the rescript or decree being used to signify the document
itself. 21. Pendants of brass. ]—Ver. 116. The ear-ring was called among
the Greeks ἐνώτιον , and
by the Romans ‘inauris.’ The Greeks also called it ἐλλόβιον , from its being inserted in the lobe
of the ear. Earrings were worn by both sexes among the Lydians,
Persians, Libyans, Carthaginians, and other nations. Among the Greeks
and Romans, the females alone were in the habit of wearing them. As with
us, the ear-ring consisted of a ring and drop, the ring being generally
of gold, though bronze was sometimes used by the common people. Pearls,
especially those of elongated form, which were called ‘elenchi,’ were
very much valued for pendants. 22. Nation of Cea. ]—Ver. 120. Cea was one of the Cyclades, and
Carthæa was one of its four cities. 23. Who are sorrowing. ]—Ver. 142. The Poet in this manner
accounts for the Roman custom of placing branches of Cypress before the
doors of houses in which a dead body lay. Pliny the Elder says, that the
Cypress was sacred to Pluto, and that for that reason it was used at
funerals, and was placed upon the pile. Varro says, that it was used for
the purpose of removing, by its own strong scent, the bad smell of the
spot where the bodies were burnt, and also of the bodies themselves. It
was also said to be so used, because, when once its bark is cut, it
withers, and is consequently emblematical of the frail tenure of human
life. 24. Phlegræan plains. ]—Ver. 151. Some authors place the
Phlegræan plains near Cumæ, in Italy, and say that in a spot near
there, much impregnated with sulphur, Jupiter, aided by Hercules and the
other Deities, conquered the Giants with his lightnings. Others say that
their locality was in that part of Macedonia which was afterwards called
Pallene; others again, in Thessaly, or Thrace. 25. Carry his bolts. ]—Ver. 158. The eagle was feigned to be the
attendant bird of Jove, among other reasons, because it was supposed to
fly higher than any other bird, to be able to fix its gaze on the sun
without being dazzled, and never to receive injury from lightning. It
was also said to have been the armour-bearer of Jupiter in his wars
against the Titans, and to have carried his thunderbolts. 26. Descendant of Amycla. ]—Ver. 162. Hyacinthus is here called
Amyclides, as though being the son of Amycla, whereas, in line 196 he is
called ‘Œbalides,’ as though the son of Œbalus. Pausamas and Apollodorus
(in one instance) say that he was the son of Amycla, the Lacedæmonian,
who founded the city of Amyclæ; though, in another place, Apollodorus
says that Piërus was his father. On the other hand, Hyginus, Lucian, and
Servius say that he was the son of Œbalus. Some explain ‘Amyclide,’ as
meaning ‘born at Amyclæ;’ and, indeed, Claudian says that he was born
there. Others, again, would have Œbalide to signify ‘born at Œbalia.’
But, if he was the son of Amycla, this could not be the signification,
as Œbalia was founded by Œbalus, who was the grandson of Amycla. The
poet, most probably, meant to style him the descendant of Amycla, as
being his great grandson, and the son of Œbalus. Again, in the 217th
line of this Book, the Poet says that he was born at Sparta; but, in the
fifth Book of the Fasti, line 223, he mentions Therapnæ, a town of
Laconia, as having been his birthplace. Perizonius thinks that Ovid has
here inadvertently confounded the different versions of the story of
Hyacinthus. 27. In the middle. ]—Ver. 168. Delphi, situated on a ridge of
Parnassus, was styled the navel of the world, as it was supposed to be
situate in the middle of the earth. The story was, that Jupiter, having
let go two eagles, or pigeons, at the opposite extremities of the earth,
with the view of ascertaining the central spot of it, they met in their
flight at this place. 28. Unfortified Sparta. ]—Ver. 169. Sparta was not fortified,
because Lycurgus considered that it ought to trust for its defence to
nothing but the valour and patriotism of its citizens. 29. The broad quoit. ]—Ver. 177. The ‘discus,’ or quoit, of the
ancients, was made of brass, iron, stone, or wood, and was about ten or
twelve inches in diameter. Sometimes, a heavy mass of iron, of
spherical form, was thrown instead of the ‘discus.’ It was perforated in
the middle, and a rope or thong being passed through, was used in
throwing it. 30. The Tænarian youth. ]—Ver. 183. Hyacinthus is so called, not
as having been born there, but because Tænarus was a famous headland or
promontory of Laconia, his native country. 31. Thou shalt imitate. ]—Ver. 206. The blood of Hyacinthus,
changing into a flower, according to the ideas of the poets, the words Αἰ, Αἰ , expressive, in the
Greek language, of lamentation, were said to be impressed on its
leaves. 32. Most valiant hero. ]—Ver. 207. He alludes to Ajax, the son
of Telamon, from whose blood, when he slew himself, a similar
flower was said to have arisen, with the letters Αἰ, Αἰ , on its leaves, expressive either of
grief, or denoting the first two letters of his name, Αἴας . See Book xiii. line 397. The
hyacinth was the emblem of death, among the ancient Greeks. 33. Mournful characters. ]—Ver. 216. The letters are called
‘funesta,’ because the words αἰ,
αἰ were the expressions of lamentation at funerals. 34. Hyacinthian festival. ]—Ver. 219. The Hyacinthia was a
festival celebrated every year at Amyclæ, in Laconia, by the people of
that town and of Sparta. Some writers say that it was held solely in
honour of Apollo; others, of Hyacinthus; but it is much more probable,
that it was intended to be in honour of both Apollo and Hyacinthus. The
festival lasted for three days, and began on the longest day of the
Spartan month, Hecatombæus. On the first and last day, sacrifices were
offered to the dead, and the fate of Hyacinthus was lamented. Garlands
were forbidden to be worn on those days, bread was not allowed to be
eaten, and no songs were recited in praise of Apollo. On the second day,
rejoicing and amusements prevailed; the praises of Apollo were sung, and
horse races were celebrated; after which, females, riding in chariots
made of wicker-work, and splendidly adorned, formed a beautiful
procession. On this day, sacrifices were offered, and the citizens kept
open houses for their friends and relations. Athenæus mentions a
favourite meal of the Laconians on this occasion, which was called κοπίς , and consisted of cakes,
bread, meat, broth, raw herbs, figs, and other fruits, with the seeds of
the lupine. Macrobius says, that chaplets of ivy were worn at the
Hyacinthia; but, of course, that remark can only apply to the second
day. Even when they had taken the field against an enemy, the people of
Amyclæ were in the habit of returning home on the approach of the
Hyacinthia, to celebrate that festival. 35. Amathus. ]—Ver. 220. Amathus was a city of Cyprus, sacred to
Venus, and famous for the mines in its neighbourhood. 36. Jupiter Hospes. ]—Ver. 224. Jupiter, in his character of Ζεῦς ξένιος , was the
guardian and protector of travellers and wayfarers. 37. Amathusian sheep. ]—Ver. 227. Amathusia was one of the names
of the island of Cyprus. 38. Ophiusian lands. ]—Ver. 229. Cyprus was anciently called
Ophiusia, on account of the number of serpents that infested it; ὄφις being the Greek for a
serpent. 39. Their bodies. ]—Ver. 240. The women of Cyprus were notorious
for the levity of their character. We learn from Herodotus that they had
recourse to prostitution to raise their marriage portions. 40. Bows from her breast. ]—Ver. 265. The ‘Redimiculum’ was a
sort of fillet, or head band, worn by females. Passing over the
shoulders, it hung on each side, over the breast. In the statues of
Venus, it was often imitated in gold. Clarke translates it by the word
‘solitaire.’ 41. Hymettian wax. ]—Ver. 284. Hymettus was a mountain of
Attica, much famed for its honey. 42. The Panchæan land. ]—Ver. 309. Panchæa was a region of
Arabia Felix, abounding in the choicest wines and frankincense. Here,
the Phœnix was said to find the materials for making its nest. 43. Its zedoary. ]—Ver. 308. ‘Costus,’ or ‘costum,’ was an
Indian shrub, which yielded a fragrant ointment, much esteemed by the
ancients. Clarke translates it ‘Coysts,’ A a word apparently
of his own coining. 44. Said to be nations. ]—Ver. 331. We do not read of any such
nations, except the fabulous Troglodytes of Ethiopia, who were supposed
to live promiscuously, like the brutes. Attica, king of the Huns, long
after Ovid’s time, married his own daughter, amid the rejoicings of his
subjects. 45. Not really. ]—Ver. 365. That is to say, not understood by
him in the sense in which Myrrha meant it. 46. To insert her neck. ]—Ver. 378. ‘Laqueoque innectere fauces
Destinat,’ is translated by Clarke, ‘And resolves to stitch up her neck
in a halter.’ 47. Of her nurse. ]—Ver. 382. Antoninus Liberalis gives this hag the name of Hippolyte. 48. Festival of Ceres. ]—Ver. 431. Commentators, in general,
suppose that he here alludes to the festival of the Thesmophoria, which
was celebrated in honour of Demeter, or Ceres, in various parts of
Greece; in general, by the married women, though the virgins joined in
some of the ceremonies. Demosthenes, Diodorus Siculus, and Plutarch, say
that it was first celebrated by Orpheus; while Herodotus states, that it
was introduced from Egypt by the daughters of Danaüs; and that, after
the Dorian conquest, it fell into disuse, being retained only by the
people of Arcadia. It was intended to commemorate the introduction of
laws and the regulations of civilized life, which were generally
ascribed to Demeter. It is not known whether the festival lasted four or five days with
the Athenians. Many days were spent by the matrons in preparing for its
celebration. The solemnity was commenced by the women walking in
procession from Athens to Eleusis. In this procession they carried on
their heads representations of the laws which had been introduced by
Ceres, and other symbols of civilized life. They then spent the night at
Eleusis, in celebrating the mysteries of the Goddess. The second day was
one of mourning, during which the women sat on the ground around the
statues of Ceres, taking no food but cakes made of sesame and honey. On
it no meetings of the people were held. Probably it was in the afternoon
of this day that there was a procession at Athens, in which the women
walked bare-footed behind a waggon, upon which were baskets, with sacred
symbols. The third day was one of merriment and festivity among the
women, in commemoration of Iämbe, who was said to have amused the
Goddess during her grief at the loss of Proserpine. An atoning
sacrifice, called ζήμια ,
was probably offered to the Goddess, at the end of this day. It is most
probable that the ceremonial lasted but three days. The women wore white
dresses during the period of its performance, and they adopted the same
colour during the celebration of the Cerealia at Rome. Burmann thinks,
that an Eastern festival, in honour of Ceres, is here referred to. If
so, no accounts of it whatever have come down to us. 49. Among the Triones. ]—Ver. 446. ‘Triones’. This word, which
is applied to the stars of the Ursa Major, or Charles’s Wain, literally
means ‘oxen;’ and is by some thought to come from ‘tero,’ ‘to bruise,’
because oxen were used for the purpose of threshing corn; but it is more
likely to have its origin from ‘terra,’ ‘the earth,’ because oxen were
used for ploughing. The Poet employs this periphrasis, to signify the
middle of the night. 50. Sabæan country. ]—Ver. 480. Sabæa, or Saba, was a region of
Arabia Felix, now called ‘Yemen.’ It was famed for its myrrh,
frankincense, and spices. In the Scriptures it is called Sheba, and it
was the queen of this region, who came to listen to the wisdom of
Solomon. 51. Warm drops distil. ]—Ver. 500. He alludes to the manner in
which frankincense is produced, it exuding from the bark of the tree in
drops; this gum, Pliny the Elder and Lucretius call by the name of
‘stacta,’ or ‘stacte.’ The ancients flavoured their wines with
myrrh. 52. Pleases even Venus. ]—Ver. 524. According to Apollodorus,
Venus had caused Myrrha to imbibe her infamous passion, because she had
treated the worship of that Goddess with contempt. 53. Cnidos. ]—Ver. 531. This was a city of Caria, situate on a
promontory. Strangers resorted thither, to behold a statue of Venus
there, which was made by Praxiteles. 54. Carry lightning. ]—Ver. 551. The lightning shock seems to be
attributed to the wild boar, from the vehemence with which he strikes
down every impediment in his way. 55. Purple hangings. ]—Ver. 595. Curtains, or hangings, called
‘aulæa,’ were used by the ancients to ornament their halls, sitting
rooms, and bed chambers. In private houses they were also sometimes hung
as coverings over doors, and in the interior, as substitutes for them.
In the palace of the Roman emperors, a slave, called ‘velarius,’
was posted at each of the principal doors, to raise the curtain when any
one passed through. Window curtains were also used by the Romans, while
they were employed in the temples, to veil the statue of the Divinity.
Ovid here speaks of them as being of purple colour; while Lucretius
mentions them as being of yellow, red, and rusty hue. 56. Last course is run. ]—Ver. 597. Among the Romans, the race
consisted of seven rounds of the Circus, or rather circuits of the
‘spina,’ or wall, in the midst of it, at each end of which was the
‘meta,’ or goal. Livy and Dio Cassius speak of seven conical balls,
resembling eggs, which were called ‘ova,’ and were placed upon the
‘spina.’ Their use was to enable the spectators to count the number of
rounds which had been run, for which reason they were seven in number;
and as each round was run, one of the ‘ova’ was put up, or, according to
Varro, taken down. The form of the egg was adopted in honour of Castor
and Pollux, who were said to have been produced from eggs. The words
‘novissima meta’ here mean either ‘the last part of the course,’ or,
possibly, ‘the last time round the course.’ 57. Onchestius his. ]—Ver. 605. But Hyginus says that Neptune
was the father of Megareus, or Macareus, as the Scholiast of Sophocles
calls him. Neptune being the father of Onchestius, Hippomenes was the
fourth from Neptune, inclusively. Onchestius founded a city of that name
in Bœotia, in honour of Neptune, who had a temple there; in the time of
Pausanias the place was in ruins. That author tells us that Megareus
aided Nisus against Minos, and was slain in that war. 58. A feminine look. ]—Ver. 631. Clarke renders this line—
‘But what a lady-like countenance there is in his boyish face !’ 59. Tamasenian field. ]—Ver. 644. Tamasis, or Tamaseus, is
mentioned by Pliny as a city of Cyprus. 60. The theatres ring. ]—Ver. 668. ‘Spectacula’ may mean either
the seats, or benches, on which the spectators sat, or an amphitheatre.
The former is most probably the meaning in the present instance. 61. Crowned with turrets. ]—Ver. 696. Cybele, the Goddess of the
Earth, was usually represented as crowned with turrets, and drawn in a
chariot by lions. 62. Are made fore-legs. ]—Ver. 700. ‘Armus’ is generally the
shoulder of a brute; while ‘humerus’ is that of a man. ‘Armus’ is
sometimes used to signify the human shoulder. 63. By their tails. ]—Ver. 701. Pliny the Elder remarks that the
temper of the lion is signified by his tail, in the same way as that of
the horse by his ears. When in motion, it shows that he is angry; when
quiet, that he is in a good temper. 64. In her light chariot. ]—Ver. 717. ‘Vecta levi curru
Cytherea,’ Clarke quaintly renders, ‘The Cytherean Goddess riding in her
light chair . 65. To change the limbs. ]—Ver. 729. Proserpine was said to have
changed the Nymph, ‘Mentha,’ into a plant of that name, which we call
‘mint.’ Some writers say that she found her intriguing with Pluto while,
according to other writers, she was the mistress of Pollux. 66. The same winds. ]—Ver. 739. The flower which sprang from the
blood of Adonis was the anemone, or wind-flower, of which Pliny the
Elder says— ‘This flower never opens but when the wind is blowing,
from which too, it receives its name, as ἄνεμος means the wind.’ —(Book i.
c. 23). Supplementary Note ( added by transcriber ) A. Clarke translates it ‘Coysts,’ ... Clarke (1752) has “costys”,
but this is hardly less obscure. 379 BOOK THE ELEVENTH. FABLE I. While Orpheus is singing to his lyre on
Mount Rhodope, the women of Thrace celebrate their orgies. During that
ceremony they take advantage of the opportunity to punish Orpheus for
his indifference towards their sex; and, in the fury inspired by their
rites, they beat him to death. His head and lyre are carried by the
stream of the river Hebrus into the sea, and are cast on shore on the
isle of Lesbos. A serpent, about to attack the head when thrown on
shore, is changed into a stone, and the Bacchanals who have killed him
are transformed into trees. While with songs such as these, the Thracian poet is leading the
woods and the natures of savage beasts, and the following rocks, lo! the
matrons of the Ciconians, having their raving breasts covered with the
skins of wild beasts, from the summit of a hill, espy Orpheus adapting
his voice to the sounded strings of his harp . One of these,
tossing her hair along the light breeze, says, “See! see! here is our
contemner!” and hurls her spear at the melodious mouth of the bard of
Apollo: but , being wreathed at the end with leaves, it makes a
mark without any wound. The weapon of another is a stone, which, when
thrown, is overpowered in the very air by the harmony of his voice and
his lyre, and lies before his feet, a suppliant, as it were, for an
attempt so daring. But still this rash warfare increases, and all moderation
departs, and direful fury reigns triumphant . And yet all
their weapons would have been conquered by his music; but the vast
clamour, and the Berecynthian pipe 1 with the blown horns, and the
tambourines, and the clapping of hands, and Bacchanalian yells,
prevented the sound of the lyre from being heard. 380 xi. 13-28. Then, at last, the stones became red with the blood of the bard, now no longer heard. But first the Mænades lay hands on
innumerable birds, even yet charmed with his voice as he sang, and
serpents, and a throng of wild beasts, the glory of this audience
of Orpheus; and after that, they turn upon Orpheus with blood-stained
right hands; and they flock together, as the birds, if at any time they
see the bird of night strolling about by day; and as when the
stag that is doomed to die 2 in the morning sand in the raised
amphitheatre is a prey to the dogs; they both attack the bard, and hurl
the thyrsi, covered with 381 xi. 28-60. green leaves, not made for such purposes as these. Some throw clods,
some branches torn from trees, others flint stones. And that weapons may
not be wanting for their fury, by chance some oxen are turning up the
earth with the depressed ploughshare; and not far from thence, some
strong-armed peasants, providing the harvest with plenteous sweat, are
digging the hard fields; they, seeing this frantic troop, run
away, and leave the implements of their labour; and there lie, dispersed
throughout the deserted fields, harrows and heavy rakes, and long
spades. After they, in their rage, have seized upon these, and have
torn to pieces the oxen with their threatening horns, they return to the
destruction of the bard; and they impiously murder him, extending his
hands, and then for the first time uttering words in vain, and making no
effect on them with his voice. And (Oh Jupiter!) through those lips
listened to by rocks, and understood by the senses of wild beasts, his
life breathed forth, departs into the breezes. 3 The mournful birds,
the crowd of wild beasts, the hard stones, the woods that oft had
followed thy song bewailed thee. Trees, too , shedding their
foliage, mourned thee, losing their leaves. They say, too, that rivers
swelled with their own tears; and the Naiads and Dryads had mourning
garments of dark colour, and dishevelled hair. The limbs lie scattered 4 in various places. Thou, Hebrus, dost receive the head and the lyre; and
(wondrous to relate !) while it rolls down the midst of the
stream, the lyre complains in I know not what kind of mournful strain.
His lifeless tongue, too , utters a mournful sound, to
which the banks mournfully reply. And now, borne onward to the sea,
they leave their native stream, and reach the shores of Methymnæan
Lesbos. 5 Here an infuriated serpent attacks the head thrown up
on the foreign sands, and the hair besprinkled with the oozing blood. At
last Phœbus comes to its aid, and drives it away as it tries to inflict
its sting, and hardens the open jaws of the serpent 382 xi. 60-84. into stone, and makes solid its gaping mouth just as it is. His ghost
descends under the earth, and he recognizes all the spots which he has
formerly seen; and seeking Eurydice through the fields of the blessed,
he finds her, and enfolds her in his eager arms. Here, one while, they
walk together side by side, 6 and at another time he follows her as
she goes before, and again at another time, walking in front,
precedes her; and now, in safety, Orpheus looks back upon his own
Eurydice. Yet Lyæus did not suffer this wickedness to go unpunished; and
grieving for the loss of the bard of his sacred rites, he immediately
fastened down in the woods, by a twisting root, all the Edonian matrons
who had committed this crime. For he drew out the toes of her feet, just
as each one had pursued him, and thrust them by their sharp points into
the solid earth. And, as when a bird has entangled its leg in a snare,
which the cunning fowler has concealed, and perceives that it is held
fast, it beats its wings, and, fluttering, tightens the noose with its
struggles; so, as each one of these had stuck fast, fixed in the ground,
in her alarm, she attempted flight in vain; but the pliant root held her
fast, and confined her, springing forward 7 to escape . And
while she is looking where her toes are, where, too , are her feet
and her nails, she sees wood growing up upon her well-turned legs.
Endeavouring, too, to smite her thigh, with grieving right hand, she
strikes solid oak; her breast, too, becomes oak; her shoulders are oak.
You would suppose that her extended arms are real boughs, and you would
not be deceived in so supposing. EXPLANATION. Some of the ancient mythologists say that the story of the serpent,
changed into stone for insulting the head of Orpheus, was founded on the
history of a certain inhabitant of the isle of Lesbos, who was punished
for attacking the reputation of Orpheus. This critic excited contempt,
as a malignant and ignorant person, who endeavoured, as it were, to
sting the character of the deceased poet, and therefore, by way of
exposing his spite and stupidity, he was said to have been changed from
a serpent into a stone. According to Philostratus, the poet’s head was
preserved in the temple of Apollo at Lesbos; and he tells us that
Diomedes, and 383 xi. 85-94. Neoptolemus, the son of Achilles, brought Philoctetes to Troy, after
having explained to him the oracular response which the head of Orpheus
had given to him from the bottom of a cave at Lesbos. The harp of Orpheus was preserved in the same temple; and so many
wonders were reported of it, that Neanthus, the son of the tyrant
Pytharus, purchased it of the priests of Apollo, believing that its
sound would be sufficient to put rocks and trees in motion; but,
according to Lucian, he succeeded so ill, that on his trying the harp,
the dogs of the neighbouring villages fell upon him and tore him to
pieces. The transformation of the women of Thrace into trees, for the murder of
Orpheus, is probably an allegory intended to show that these furious and
ill-conditioned females did not escape punishment for their misdeeds;
and that they were driven by society to pass the rest of their lives in
woods and caverns. FABLE II. Bacchus , having punished the Thracian
women for the murder of Orpheus, leaves Thrace. His tutor, Silenus,
having become intoxicated, loses his companions, and is brought by some
Phrygian peasants to Midas. He sends him to Bacchus, on which the God,
in acknowledgment of his kindness, promises him whatever favour he may
desire. Midas asks to be able to turn everything that he touches into
gold. This power is granted; but, soon convinced of his folly, Midas
begs the God to deprive him of it, on which he is ordered to bathe in
the river Pactolus. He obeys the God, and communicates the power which
he possesses to the stream; from which time that river has golden
sands. And this is not enough for Bacchus. He resolves to forsake the
country itself, and, with a superior train, he repairs to the vineyards
of his own Tymolus, and Pactolus; although it was not golden at that
time, nor to be coveted for its precious sands. The usual throng, both Satyrs and Bacchanals, surround him, but Silenus is away.
The Phrygian rustics took him, as he was staggering with age and wine,
and, bound with garlands, they led him to their king, Midas, to
whom, together with the Cecropian Eumolpus, 8 the Thracian Orpheus
had intrusted the mysterious orgies of Bacchus . Soon as he
recognized this associate 384 xi. 94-130. and companion of these rites, he hospitably kept a festival on the
coming of this guest, for twice five days, and as many nights
joined in succession. “And now the eleventh Lucifer had closed the lofty host of the stars,
when the king came rejoicing to the Lydian lands, and restored Silenus
to the youth, his foster-child. To him the God, being glad at the
recovery of his foster-father, gave the choice of desiring a favour,
pleasing, indeed , but useless, as it turned out . He,
destined to make a foolish use of the favour, says, ‘Cause that whatever
I shall touch with my body shall be turned into yellow gold.’ Liber
assents to his wish, and grants him the hurtful favour, and is grieved
that he has not asked for something better. The Berecynthian hero 9 departs joyful, and rejoices in his own misfortune, and tries the truth
of his promise by touching everything. And, hardly believing himself, he
pulls down a twig from a holm-oak, growing on a bough not lofty; the
twig becomes gold. He takes up a stone from the ground; the stone, too,
turns pale with gold. He touches a clod, also; by his potent touch the
clod becomes a mass of gold . He plucks some dry ears of corn,
that wheat is golden. He holds an apple taken from a tree, you would
suppose that the Hesperides had given it. If he places his fingers upon
the lofty door-posts, then the posts are seen to glisten. When,
too, he has washed his hands in the liquid stream, the water flowing
from his hands might have deceived Danaë. He scarcely can contain his
own hopes in his mind, imagining everything to be of gold. As he is thus rejoicing, his servants set before him a table supplied with
dainties, and not deficient in parched corn. But then, whether he
touches the gifts of Ceres with his right hand, the gifts of Ceres, as gold , become hard; or if he attempts to bite the dainties with
hungry teeth, those dainties, upon the application of his teeth, shine
as yellow plates of gold. Bacchus , the grantor of this favour, he
mingles with pure water; you could see liquid gold flowing through his
jaws. “Astonished at the novelty of his misfortune, being both rich and
wretched, he wishes to escape from his wealth, and now he hates
what but so lately he has wished for; no plenty relieves his hunger, dry
thirst parches his throat, and he is deservedly tormented 385 xi. 130-145. by the now hated gold; and raising his hands towards heaven, and
his shining arms, he says, “Grant me pardon, father Lenæus; I have
done wrong, but have pity on me, I pray, and deliver me from this
specious calamity!” Bacchus, the gentle Divinity among the Gods,
restored him, as he confessed that he had done wrong, to his former
state , and annulled his given promise, and the favour that was
granted: “And that thou mayst not remain overlaid with thy gold, so
unhappily desired, go,” said he, “to the river adjoining to great
Sardis, 10 and trace thy way, meeting the waters as they fall
from the height of the mountain, until thou comest to the rise of the
stream. And plunge thy head beneath the bubbling spring, where it bursts
forth most abundantly, and at once purge thy body, at once thy crime.”
The king placed himself beneath the waters prescribed; the golden virtue
tinged the river, and departed from the human body into the stream. And
even now, the fields, receiving the ore of this ancient vein of
gold , are hard, growing of pallid colour, from their clods imbibing
the gold. EXPLANATION. The ancients divided the Divinities into several classes, and in the
last class, which Ovid calls the populace, or commonalty of the Gods,
were the Satyrs and Sileni. The latter, according to Pausanias, were no
other than Satyrs of advanced age. There seems, however, to have been
one among them, to whom the name of Silenus was especially given, and to
him the present story relates. According to Pindar and Pausanias he was
born at Malea, in Laconia; while Theopompus, quoted by Ælian, represents
him as being the son of a Nymph. He was inferior to the higher
Divinities, but superior to man, in not being subject to mortality. He
was represented as bald, flat-nosed, and red-faced, a perfect
specimen of a drunken old man. He is often introduced either sitting on
an ass, or reeling along on foot, with a thyrsus to support him. He was said to have tended the education of the infant Bacchus, and
indeed, according to the author whose works are quoted as those of
Orpheus, he was an especial favourite of the Gods; while some writers
represent him not as a drunken old man, but as a learned philosopher and
a skilful commander. Lucian combines the two characters, and describes
him as an aged man with large straight ears and a huge belly, wearing
yellow clothes, and generally mounted on an ass, or supported by a
staff, but, nevertheless, as being a skilful general. Hyginus says, that
the Phrygian peasants found Midas near a fountain, into which, 386 according to Xenophon, some one had put wine, which had made him drunk.
In his interview with Midas, according to Theopompus, as quoted by
Ælian, they had a conversation concerning that unknown region of the
earth, to which Plato refers under the name of the New Atlantis, and
which, after long employing the speculations of the ancient
philosophers, was realized to the moderns in the discovery of America.
The passage is sufficiently curious to deserve to be quoted. He says,
“Asia, Europe, and Libya, are but three islands, surrounded by the
ocean; but beyond that ocean there is a vast continent, whose bounds are
entirely unknown to us. The men and the animals of that country are much
larger, and live much longer than those of this part of the world. Their
towns are fine and magnificent; their customs are different from ours;
and they are governed by different laws. They have two cities, one of
which is called ‘the Warlike,’ and the other ‘the Devout.’ The
inhabitants of the first city are much given to warfare, and make
continual attacks upon their neighbours, whom they bring under their
subjection. Those who inhabit the other city are peaceable, and blessed
with plenty; the earth without toil or tillage furnishing them with
abundance of the necessaries of life. Except their sick, they all live
in the midst of riches and continual festivity and pleasure; but they
are so just and righteous that the Gods themselves delight to go
frequently and pass their time among them. “The warlike people of the first city having extended their conquests
in their own vast continent, made an irruption into ours, with a million
of men, as far as the country of the Hyperboreans; but when they saw
their mode of living, they deemed them to be unworthy of their notice,
and returned home. These warriors rarely die of sickness; they delight
in warfare, and generally lose their lives in battle. There is also in
this new world another numerous people called Meropes; and in their
country is a place called ‘Anostus,’ that is to say, ‘not to be
repassed,’ because no one ever comes back from thence. It is a dreadful
abyss, having no other than a reddish sort of light. There are two
rivers in that place; one called the River of Sorrow, and the other the
River of Mirth. Trees as large as planes grow about these rivers. Those
who eat of the fruit of the trees growing near the River of Sorrow, pass
their lives in affliction, weeping continually, even to their last
breath; but such as eat of the fruit of the other trees, forget the
past, and revert through the different stages of their life, and then
die.” Ælian regards the passage as a mere fable, and the latter part is
clearly allegorical. The mention of the two cities, ‘the Warlike’ and
‘the Devout,’ can hardly fail to remind us of Japan, with its spiritual
and temporal capitals. Some writers say, that Silenus was the king of Caria, and was the
contemporary and friend of Midas, to whom his counsel proved of
considerable service, in governing his dominions. He was probably called
the foster-father or tutor, of Bacchus, because he introduced his
worship into Phrygia and the neighbouring countries. 387 xi. 146-169. FABLE III. Pan is so elated with the praises of
some Nymphs who hear the music of his pipe, that he presumes to
challenge Apollo to play with him. The mountain God, Tmolus, who is
chosen umpire of the contest, decides in favour of Apollo, and the whole
company approve of his judgment except Midas, who, for his stupidity in
preferring Pan, receives a pair of asses’ ears. He carefully conceals
them till they are discovered by his barber, who publishes his deformity
in a very singular manner. He, abhorring riches, inhabited the woods and the fields, and followed Pan, who always dwells in caves of the mountains; but
his obtuse understanding 11 still remained, and the impulse of
his foolish mind was fated again, as before, to be an injury to its
owner. For the lofty Tmolus, looking far and wide over the sea, stands
erect, steep with its lofty ascent; and extending in its descent on
either side, is bounded on the one side by Sardis, on the other by the
little Hypæpæ. While Pan is there boasting of his strains to the charming Nymphs,
and is warbling a little tune upon the reeds joined with wax, daring to
despise the playing of Apollo in comparison with his own, he comes to
the unequal contest under the arbitration of Tmolus. 12 The aged
umpire seats himself upon his own mountain, and frees his ears of the incumbering trees. His azure-coloured hair is only covered with
oak, and acorns hang around his hollow temples. And looking at the God
of the flocks, he says, “there is no delay in me , your umpire.”
He sounds his rustic reeds, and delights Midas with his uncouth music;
for he, by chance, is present as he plays. After this the sacred Tmolus
turns his face towards the countenance of Apollo; his words follow the direction of his face. He, having his yellow head wreathed
with Parnassian laurel, sweeps the ground with his robe, soaked in
Tyrian purple, 13 and supports with his left hand his lyre, adorned
with gems and Indian ivory; the other hand holds the plectrum. The very
posture 388 xi. 169-193. is that of an artist. He then touches the strings with a skilful thumb;
charmed by the sweetness of which, Tmolus bids Pan to hold his reeds in
submission to the lyre; and the judgment and decision of the sacred
mountain pleases them all. Yet it is blamed, and is called unjust by the
voice of Midas alone. But the Delian God does not allow his
stupid ears to retain their human shape: but draws them out to a great length, and he fills them with grey hairs, and makes them
unsteady at the lower part, and gives them the power of moving. The rest of his body is that of a man; in one part alone is he condemned to punishment ; and he assumes the ears of the slowly moving
ass. He, indeed, concealed them, and endeavoured to veil his temples,
laden with this foul disgrace, with a purple turban. But a servant, who
was wont to cut his hair, when long, with the steel scissars , saw it;
who, when he did not dare disclose the disgraceful thing he had seen,
though desirous to publish it, and yet could not keep it secret,
retired, and dug up the ground, and disclosed, in a low voice, what kind
of ears he had beheld on his master, and whispered it to the earth cast
up. And then he buried this discovery of his voice with the earth
thrown in again, and, having covered up the ditch, departed in
silence. There, a grove, thick set with quivering reeds, began to rise; and as
soon as it came to maturity, after a complete year, it betrayed its
planter. For, moved by the gentle South wind, it repeated the words there buried, and disclosed the ears of his master. EXPLANATION. Midas, according to Pausanias, was the son of Gordius and Cybele, and
reigned in the Greater Phrygia. Strabo says that he and his father kept
their court near the river Sangar, in cities which, in the time of that
author had become mean villages. As Midas was very rich, and at the same
time very frugal, it was reported that whatever he touched was at once
turned into gold; and Bacchus was probably introduced into his story,
because Midas had favoured the introduction of his worship, and was
consequently supposed to have owed his success to the good offices of
that Divinity. He was probably the first who extracted gold from the
sands of the river Pactolus, and in that circumstance the story may have
originated. Strabo says that Midas found the treasures which he
possessed in the mines of Mount Bermius. It was said that in his infancy
some ants were seen to creep into his cradle, and to put grains of wheat
in his mouth, which was supposed to portend that he would be rich and
frugal. 389 xi. 194-204. As he was very stupid and ignorant, the fable of his preference of the
music of Pan to that of Apollo was invented, to which was added,
perhaps, as a mark of his stupidity, that the God gave him a pair of
asses’ ears. The scholiast of Aristophanes, to explain the story, says
either it was intended to shew that Midas, like the ass, was very quick
of hearing, or in other words, had numerous spies in all parts of his
dominions; or, it was invented, because his usual place of residence was
called Onouta, ὄνου ὦτα ,
‘the ears of an ass.’ Strabo says that he took a draught of warm
bullock’s blood, from the effects of which he died; and, according to
Plutarch, he did so to deliver himself from the frightful dreams with
which he was tormented. Tmolus, the king of Lydia, according to Clitophon, was the son of Mars
and the Nymph Theogene, or, according to Eustathius, of Sipylus and
Eptonia. Having violated Arriphe, a Nymph of Diana, he was, as a
punishment, tossed by a bull, and falling on some sharp pointed stakes,
he lost his life, and was buried on the mountain that afterwards bore
his name. FABLE IV. Apollo and Neptune build the walls of
Troy for king Laomedon, who refuses to give the Gods the reward which he
has promised: on which Neptune punishes his perjury by an inundation of
his country. Laomedon is then obliged to expose his daughter to a sea
monster, in order to appease the God. Hercules delivers her; and
Laomedon defrauds him likewise of the horses which he has promised him.
In revenge, Hercules plunders the city of Troy, and carries off Hesione,
whom he gives in marriage to his companion Telamon. The son of Latona, having thus revenged himself, departs from
Tmolus, and, borne through the liquid air, rests on the plains of
Laomedon, on this side of the narrow sea of Helle, the daughter of
Nephele. On the right hand of Sigæum and on the left of the lofty
Rhœtæum, 14 there is an ancient altar dedicated to the
Panomphæan 15 Thunderer. Thence, he sees Laomedon now first
building the walls of rising Troy, and that this great undertaking is
growing up with difficult labour, and requires no small resources. And then , with the trident-bearing father of the raging deep, he
assumes a mortal form, and for the Phrygian king they build the walls, 16 a sum of gold being agreed on for the
defences. 390 xi. 205-220. The work is now finished; the king refuses the reward, and, as
a completion of his perfidy, adds perjury to his false words. “Thou
shalt not escape unpunished,” says the king of the sea; and he drives
all his waters towards the shores of covetous Troy. He turns the land,
too, into the form of the sea, and carries off the wealth of the
husbandmen, and overwhelms the fields with waves. Nor is this punishment
sufficient: the daughter of the king, is also demanded for a sea
monster. Chained to the rugged rocks, Alcides delivers her, and demands
the promised reward, the horses agreed upon; and the recompense of so
great a service being denied him, he captures the twice-perjured walls
of conquered Troy. Nor does Telamon, a sharer in the warfare, come
off without honour; and he obtains Hesione, who is given to him. But Peleus was distinguished by a Goddess for his wife; nor was he
more proud of the name of his grandfather than that of his
father-in-law. 17 Since, not to his lot alone did it fall to be the
grandson of Jove; to him alone, was a Goddess given for a wife. EXPLANATION. Laomedon, being King of Troy, and the city being open and defenceless,
he undertook to enclose it with walls, and succeeded so well, that the
work was attributed to Apollo. The strong banks which he was obliged to
raise to keep out the sea and to prevent inundations, were regarded as
the work of Neptune. In time, these banks being broken down by tempests,
it was reported that the God of the sea had thus revenged himself on
Laomedon, for refusing him the reward which had been agreed upon between
them. This story received the more ready credit from the circumstance
mentioned by Herodotus and Eustathius, that this king used the treasure
belonging to the temple of Neptune, in raising these embankments, and
building the walls of his city; having promised the priests to restore
it when he should be in a condition to do so; which promise he never
performed. Homer says that Neptune and Apollo tended the flocks while
all the subjects of Laomedon were engaged in building the walls. When these embankments were laid under water, and a plague began to rage
within the city, the Trojans were told by an oracle that to appease the
God of the sea, they must sacrifice a virgin of the royal blood. The lot
fell upon Hesione, and she was exposed to the fury of a sea-monster.
Hercules offered to deliver her for a reward of six horses, 391 xi. 211-228. and having succeeded, was refused his recompense by Laomedon; whom he
slew, and then plundered his city. He then gave the kingdom to Podarces,
the son of Laomedon, and Hesione to his companion Telamon, who had
assisted him. This monster was probably an allegorical representation of
the inundations of the sea; and Hesione having been made the price of
him that could succeed in devising a remedy, she was said to have been
exposed to the fury of a monster. The six horses promised by Laomedon
were perhaps so many ships, which Hercules demanded for his recompense;
and this is the more likely, as the ancients said that these horses were
so light and swift, that they ran upon the waves, which story seems to
point at the qualities of a galley or ship under sail. Lycophron gives a more wonderful version of the story. He says that the
monster, to which Hesione was exposed, devoured Hercules, and that he
was three days in its belly, and came out, having lost all his hair.
This is, probably, a way of telling us that Hercules and his
assistants were obliged to work in the water, which incommoded them very
much. Palæphatus gives another explanation: he says that Hesione was
about to be delivered up to a pirate, and that Hercules, on boarding his
ship, was wounded, although afterwards victorious. FABLES V. AND VI. Proteus foretells that Thetis shall
have a son, who shall be more powerful than his father, and shall exceed
him in valour. Jupiter, who is in love with Thetis, is alarmed at this
prediction, and yields her to Peleus. The Goddess flies from his
advances by assuming various shapes, till, by the advice of Proteus, he
holds her fast, and then having married her, she bears Achilles. Peleus
goes afterwards to Ceyx, king of Trachyn, to expiate the death of his
brother Phocus, whom he has killed. Ceyx is in a profound melancholy,
and tells him how his brother Dædalion, in the transports of his grief
for his daughter Chione, who had been slain for vying with Diana, has
been transformed into a hawk. During this relation, Peleus is informed
that a wolf which Psamathe has sent to revenge the death of Phocus, is
destroying his herds. He endeavours to avert the wrath of the Goddess,
but she is deaf to his entreaties, till, by the intercession of Thetis,
she is appeased, and she turns the wolf into stone. For the aged Proteus had said to Thetis, “Goddess of the waves,
conceive; thou shalt be the mother of a youth, who by his gallant
actions shall surpass the deeds of his father, and shall be called
greater than he.” Therefore, lest the world might contain something
greater than Jove, although he had felt no gentle flame in his breast,
Jupiter avoided the embraces of Thetis, 18 the Goddess of the sea, and commanded his grandson, 392 xi. 228-258. the son of Æacus, 19 to succeed to his own pretensions, and rush into
the embraces of the ocean maid. There is a bay of Hæmonia, curved into a
bending arch; its arms project out; there, were the water but deeper, there would be a harbour, but the sea is just covering the surface of the sand. It has a firm shore, which retains not
the impression of the foot, nor delays the step of the traveller ,
nor is covered with sea-weeds. There is a grove of myrtle at hand,
planted with particoloured berries. In the middle there is a cave,
whether formed by nature or art, it is doubtful; still, by art rather.
To this, Thetis, thou wast wont often to come naked, seated on thy
harnessed dolphin. There Peleus seized upon thee, as thou wast lying
fast bound in sleep; and because, being tried by entreaties, thou didst
resist, he resolved upon violence, clasping thy neck with both his arms.
And, unless thou hadst had recourse to thy wonted arts, by frequently
changing thy shape, he would have succeeded in his attempt. But, at one
moment, thou wast a bird (still, as a bird he held thee fast); at
another time a large tree: to that tree did Peleus cling. Thy
third form was that of a spotted tiger; frightened by that, the son of
Æacus loosened his arms from thy body. Then pouring wine upon its waters, 20 he worshipped the Gods of the
sea, both with the entrails of sheep and with the smoke of frankincense;
until the Carpathian 21 prophet said, from the middle of the waves,
“Son of Æacus, thou shalt gain the alliance desired by thee. Do thou
only, when she shall be resting fast asleep in the cool cave, bind her
unawares with cords and tenacious bonds. And let her not deceive thee,
by imitating a hundred forms; but hold her fast, whatever she shall be,
until she shall reassume the form which she had before.” Proteus said
this, and hid his face in the sea, and received his own waves at his
closing words. Titan was now descending, and, with the pole of
his chariot bent downward, was taking possession of the Hesperian main;
when the beautiful 393 xi. 228-289. Nereid, leaving the deep, entered her wonted place of repose. Hardly had
Peleus well seized the virgin’s limbs, when she changed her
shape, until she perceived her limbs to be held fast, and her arms to be
extended different ways. Then, at last, she sighed, and said, “Not
without the aid of a Divinity, dost thou overcome me;” and then
she appeared as Thetis again . The hero embraced her thus revealed, and enjoyed his wish, and by her was the father of
great Achilles. And happy was Peleus in his son, happy, too, in his wife, and one to
whose lot all blessings had fallen, if you except the crime of
his killing Phocus. The Trachinian land 22 received him
guilty of his brother’s blood, and banished from his native home. Here
Ceyx, sprung from Lucifer for his father, and having the comeliness of
his sire in his face, held the sway without violence and without
bloodshed, who, being sad at that time and unlike his former self, lamented the loss of his brother. After the son of Æacus, wearied,
both with troubles and the length of the journey, has arrived there, and
has entered the city with a few attending him, and has left the flocks
of sheep and the herds which he has brought with him, not far from the
walls, in a shady valley; when an opportunity is first afforded him of
approaching the prince, extending the symbols of peace 23 with his
suppliant hand, he tells him who he is, and from whom descended. He only
conceals his crime, and, dissembling as to the true reason of his
banishment, he entreats him to aid him by a reception either in his city or in his territory. On the other hand, the
Trachinian prince addresses him with gentle lips, in words such
as these: “Peleus, our bounties are open even to the lowest ranks, nor
do I hold an inhospitable sway. To this my inclination, thou bringest in
addition as powerful inducements, an illustrious name, and Jupiter as
thy grandsire. And do not lose thy time in entreaty; all that thou
askest thou shalt have. Look upon all these things, whatever thou seest,
as in part thy own: would that thou couldst behold them in better
condition!” and then 394 xi. 289-320. he weeps. Pelcus and his companions enquire what it is that occasions
grief so great. To them he thus speaks:— “Perhaps you may think that this bird, which lives upon prey, and
affrights all the birds, always had wings. It was a man; and as great is
the vigour of its courage, as he who was Dædalion by name was
active, and bold in war, and ready for violence; he was sprung
from him, for his father, who summons forth 24 Aurora, and
withdraws the last from the heavens. Peace was cherished by me; the care
of maintaining peace and my marriage contract was mine; cruel warfare
pleased my brother; that prowess of his subdued both kings and nations,
which, changed, now chases the Thisbean doves. 25 Chione was his
daughter, who, highly endowed with beauty, was pleasing to a thousand
suitors, when marriageable at the age of twice seven years. By chance
Phœbus, and the son of Maia, returning, the one from his own Delphi, the
other from the heights of Cyllene, beheld her at the same moment, and at
the same moment were inspired with passion. Apollo defers his hope of
enjoyment until the hours of night; the other brooks no delay, and with
his wand, that causes sleep, touches the maiden’s face. At the potent
touch she lies entranced, and suffers violence from the God. Night has now bespangled the heavens with stars; Phœbus personates an old
woman, and takes those delights before enjoyed in imagination .
When her mature womb had completed the destined time, Autolycus
was born, a crafty offspring of the stock of the God with winged
feet, ingenious at every kind of theft, and who used, not
degenerating from his father’s skill, 26 to make white out of black,
and black out of white. From Phœbus was born (for she brought forth
twins) Philammon, famous for his tuneful song, and for his lyre. “ But what avails it for her to have brought forth two
children, and to have been pleasing to two Gods, and to have sprung from
a valiant father, and the Thunderer as her ancestor? 27 395 xi. 320-353. Is even glory thus prejudicial to many? To her, at least, it was
a prejudice; who dared to prefer herself to Diana, and decried the
charms of the Goddess. But violent wrath was excited in her, and she
said, ‘We will please her by our deeds.’ 28 And there was no
delay: she bent her bow, and let fly an arrow from the string, and
pierced with the reed the tongue that deserved it. The tongue was
silent; nor did her voice, and the words which she attempted to
utter, now follow; and life, with her blood, left her, as she
endeavoured to speak. Oh hapless affection! What pain did I then endure in my heart, as her uncle, and what consolations did I give to my
affectionate brother? These the father received no otherwise than rocks
do the murmurs of the ocean, and he bitterly lamented his daughter thus snatched from him. But when he beheld her burning, four
times had he an impulse to rush into the midst of the pile; thence
repulsed, four times did he commit his swift limbs to flight, and, like
an ox, bearing upon his galled neck the stings of hornets, he rushed
where there was no path. Already did he seem to me to run faster than a
human being, and you would have supposed that his feet had assumed
wings. Therefore he outran all; and, made swift by the desire for death,
he gained the heights of Parnassus. “Apollo pitying him, when Dædalion would have thrown himself from the
top of the rock, made him into a bird, and supported him, hovering in
the air upon these sudden wings; and he gave him a curved
beak, and crooked claws on his talons, his former courage, and strength
greater in proportion than his body; and, now become a
hawk, sufficiently benignant to none, he rages equally against
all birds; and grieving himself , becomes the cause of grief to
others.” While the son of Lucifer is relating these wonders about his brother,
hastening with panting speed, Phocæan Antenor, the keeper of his herds,
runs up to him. “Alas, Peleus! Peleus!” says he, “I am the
messenger to thee of a great calamity;” and then Peleus bids him
declare whatever news it is that he has brought; and the Trachinian hero
himself is in suspense, and trembles through apprehension. The other
tells his story: “I had driven the weary bullocks to the
winding shore, when 396 xi. 353-388. the Sun at his height, in the midst of his course, could look back on as
much of it as he could see to be now remaining; and a part of the
oxen had bent their knees on the yellow sands, and, as they lay, viewed
the expanse of the wide waters; some, with slow steps, were wandering
here and there; others were swimming, and appearing with their lofty
necks above the waves. A temple is hard by the sea, adorned neither
with marble nor with gold, but made of solid beams, and shaded
with an ancient grove; the Nereids and Nereus possess it. A sailor,
while he was drying his nets upon the shore, told us that these were the
Gods of the temple. Adjacent to this is a marsh, planted thickly with
numerous willows, which the water of the stagnating waves of the sea has
made into a swamp. From that spot, a huge monster, a wolf,
roaring with a loud bellowing, alarms the neighbouring places, and comes
forth from the thicket of the marsh, both having his thundering
jaws covered with foam and with clotted blood, and his eyes
suffused with red flame. Though he was raging both with fury and with
hunger, still was he more excited by fury; for he did not care to
satisfy his hunger by the slaughter of the oxen, and to satiate his
dreadful appetite, but he mangled the whole herd, and, like a true foe,
pulled each to the ground . Some, too, of ourselves, while we were
defending them, wounded with his fatal bite, were killed. The shore and
the nearest waves were red with blood, and the fens were filled with the
lowings of the herd . But delay is dangerous, and the case does
not allow us to hesitate: while anything is still left, let us
all unite, and let us take up arms, arms, I say , and in a
body let us bear weapons.” Thus speaks the countryman. And the loss does not affect
Peleus; but, remembering his crime, he considers that the bereaved
Nereid has sent these misfortunes of his, as an offering to the departed
Phocus. The Œtæan king 29 commands his men to put on their armour, and
to take up stout weapons; together with whom, he himself is preparing to
go. But Halcyone, his wife, alarmed at the tumult, runs out, and not yet
having arranged all her hair, even that which is arranged she
throws in disorder; and clinging to the neck of her husband, she
entreats him, both with words and tears, to send assistance without
himself, and so to save two lives in one. 397 xi. 388-409. The son of Æacus says to her, “O queen, lay aside thy commendable
and affectionate fears; the kindness of thy proposal is too great for me . It does not please me, that arms should be employed
against this new monster. The Divinity of the sea must be adored.” There
is a lofty tower; a fire is upon the extreme summit, 30 a place grateful to wearied ships. They go up there, and with sighs
they behold the bulls lying scattered upon the sea shore, and the cruel
ravager with blood-stained mouth, having his long hair stained with
gore. Peleus, thence extending his hands towards the open sea, entreats
the azure Psamathe to lay aside her wrath, and to give him her aid. But
she is not moved by the words of the son of Æacus, thus entreating.
Thetis, interceding on behalf of her husband, obtains that favour for
him . But still the wolf persists, not recalled from the furious slaughter, and keenly urged by the sweetness of the blood; until she changes
him into marble, as he is fastening on the neck of a mangled heifer. His
body preserves every thing except its colour. The colour of the stone
shows that he is not now a wolf, and ought not now to be feared. Still,
the Fates do not permit the banished Peleus to settle in this land: the
wandering exile goes to the Magnetes, 31 and there receives from the
Hæmonian Acastus 32 an expiation of the murder. 398 EXPLANATION. Thetis being a woman of extraordinary beauty, it is not improbable, that
in the Epithalamia that were composed on her marriage, it was asserted,
that the Gods had contended for her hand, and had been forced to give
way, in obedience to the superior power of destiny. Hyginus says that
Prometheus was the only person that was acquainted with the oracle; and
that he imparted it to Jupiter, on condition that he would deliver him
from the eagle that tormented him: whereupon the God sent Hercules to
Mount Caucasus, to perform his promise. It was on the occasion of this
marriage that the Goddess Discord presented the golden apple, the
dispute for which occasioned the Trojan war. The part of the story which
relates how she assumed various forms, to avoid the advances of Peleus,
is perhaps an ingenious method of stating, that having several suitors,
she was originally disinclined to Peleus, and used every pretext to
avoid him, until, by the advice of a wise friend, he found means to
remove all the difficulties which opposed his alliance with her. Some writers state that Thetis was the daughter of Chiron; but
Euripides, in a fragment of his Iphigenia, tells us that Achilles, who
was the son of this marriage, took a pride in carrying the figure of a
Nereid on his shield. The three sons of Æacus were Peleus, Telamon, and
Phocus; while they were playing at quoits, the latter accidentally
received a blow from Peleus, which killed him. Ovid, however, seems here
to imply that Peleus killed his brother purposely. The story of Chione most probably took its rise from the difference
between the inclinations of the two children that she bore. Autolycus,
being cunning, and addicted to theft, he was styled the son of Mercury;
while Philammon being a lover of music, Apollo was said to be his
father. According to Pausanias, Autolycus was the son of Dædalion, and
not of Chione. The story of the wolf, the minister of the vengeance of
Psamathe, for the death of Phocus, is probably built on historical
grounds. Æacus had two wives, Ægina and Psamathe, the sister of Thetis;
by the first he had Peleus and Telamon; by the second, Phocus.
Lycomedes, the king of Scyros, the brother of Psamathe, resolved to
revenge the death of his nephew, whom Peleus had killed: and declared
war against Ceyx, for receiving him into his dominions. The troops of
Lycomedes ravaged the country, and carried away the flocks of Peleus: on
which prayers and entreaties were resorted to, with the view of
pacifying him; which object having been effected, he withdrew his
troops. On this, it was rumoured that he was changed into a rock, after
having ravaged the country like a wild beast, which comparison was
perhaps suggested by the fact of his name being partly compounded of the
word λυκὸς , ‘a wolf.’ 399 xi. 410-429. FABLE VII. Ceyx , going to Claros, to consult the
oracle about his brother’s fate, is shipwrecked on the voyage. Juno
sends Iris to the God of Sleep, who, at her request, dispatches Morpheus
to Halcyone, in a dream, to inform her of the death of her husband. She
awakes in the morning, full of solicitude, and goes to the shore where
she finds the body of Ceyx thrown up by the waves. She is about to cast
herself into the sea in despair, when the Gods transform them both into
king-fishers. In the mean time, Ceyx being disturbed in mind, both on account of
the strange fate of his brother, and the wonders that had
succeeded his brother, prepares to go to the Clarian God, that he may
consult the sacred oracle, the consolation of mortals: for the profane
Phorbas, 33 with his Phlegyans, renders the oracle of
Delphi inaccessible. Yet he first makes thee acquainted with his design,
most faithful Halcyone, whose bones receive a chill, and a paleness,
much resembling boxwood, comes over her face, and her cheeks are wet
with tears gushing forth. Three times attempting to speak, three times
she moistens her face with tears, and, sobs interrupting her
affectionate complaints, she says:— “What fault of mine, my dearest, has changed thy mind? Where is that
care of me, which once used to exist? Canst thou now be absent without
anxiety, thy Halcyone being left behind? Now, is a long journey pleasing
to thee? Now, am I dearer to thee when at a distance? But I suppose thy
journey is by land, and I shall only grieve, and shall not fear as well,
and my anxiety will be free from apprehension. The seas and the aspect
of the stormy ocean affright me. And lately I beheld broken planks on
the sea shore; and often have I read the names upon tombs, 34 without bodies there buried . 400 xi. 430-460. And let not any deceitful assurance influence thy mind, that the
grandson of Hippotas 35 is thy father-in-law; who confines the strong
winds in prison, and assuages the seas when he pleases. When, once let
loose, the winds have taken possession of the deep, nothing is forbidden
to them; every land and every sea is disregarded by them. Even the
clouds of heaven do they insult, and by their bold onsets strike forth
the brilliant fires. 36 The more I know them, (for I do know them,
and, when little, have often seen them in my father’s abode,) the more I
think they are to be dreaded. But if thy resolution, my dear husband,
cannot be altered by my entreaties, and if thou art but too
determined to go; take me, too, as well. At least, we shall be tossed
together; nor shall I fear anything, but what I shall be then suffering; and together we shall endure whatever shall happen; together
we shall be carried over the wide seas.” By such words and the tears of the daughter of Æolus, is her husband,
son of the Morning Star, much affected; for the flame of love exists no less in him. But he neither wishes to abandon
his proposed voyage, nor to admit Halcyone to a share in the danger; and
he says, in answer, many things to console her timorous breast. And yet
she does not, on that account, approve of his reasons. To them he adds
this alleviation, with which alone he influences his affectionate wife : “All delay will, indeed, be tedious to me; but I swear to
thee by the fire of my sire, (if only the fates allow me to return,)
that I will come back before the moon has twice completed her orb.”
When, by these promises, a hope has been given her of his speedy return, he forthwith orders a ship, drawn out of the dock,
to be launched in the sea, and to be supplied with its proper equipments. On seeing this, Halcyone again shuddered, as though
presaging the future, and shed her flowing tears, and gave him embraces;
and at last, in extreme misery, she said, with a sad voice, “Farewell!”
and then she sank with all her body to the ground . 401 xi. 461-479. But the youths, while Ceyx is still seeking pretexts for
delay, in double rows, 37 draw the oars towards their hardy breasts,
and cleave the main with equal strokes. She raises her weeping eyes, and
sees her husband standing on the crooked stern, and by waving his hand
making the first signs to her; and she returns the signals. When the
land has receded further, and her eyes are unable to distinguish his
countenance: still , while she can, she follows the retreating
ship with her sight. When this too, borne onward, cannot be
distinguished from the distance; still she looks at the sails waving
from the top of the mast. When she no longer sees the sails; she
anxiously seeks her deserted bed, and lays herself on the couch. The
bed, and the spot, renew the tears of Halcyone, and remind her what part of herself is wanting. They have now gone out of harbour, and the breeze shakes the
rigging; the sailor urges the pendent oars towards their sides; 38 and
fixes the sailyards 39 on the top of the mast, and spreads the
canvass full from the mast, and catches the coming breezes. Either the
smaller part, or, at least, not more than half her course, had now been cut by the ship, and both lands were at a 402 xi. 479-515. great distance, when, towards night, the sea began to grow white with
swelling waves, and the boisterous East wind to blow with greater
violence. Presently the master cries, “At once, lower the top sails, and
furl the whole of the sail to the yards!” He orders, but the
adverse storm impedes the execution; and the roaring of the sea does not
allow any voice to be heard. Yet, of their own accord, some hasten to draw in the oars, some to
secure the sides, some to withdraw the sails from the winds. This one
pumps up the waves, and pours back the sea into the sea; another takes
off the yards. While these things are being done without any order, the
raging storm is increasing, and the fierce winds wage war on every side,
and stir up the furious main. The master of the ship is himself alarmed,
and himself confesses that he does not know what is their present condition, nor what to order or forbid; so great is the amount of their
misfortunes, and more powerful than all his skill. For the men are
making a noise with their shouts, the cordage with its rattling, the
heavy waves with the dashing of other waves, the skies with the
thunder. The sea is upturned with billows, and appears to reach the
heavens, and to sprinkle the surrounding clouds with its foam. And one
while, when it turns up the yellow sands from the bottom, it is of the
same colour with them; at another time it is blacker than the
Stygian waves. Sometimes it is level, and is white with resounding foam.
The Trachinian ship too, is influenced by these vicissitudes; and now
aloft, as though from the summit of a mountain, it seems to look down
upon the vallies and the depths of Acheron; at another moment, when the
engulphing sea has surrounded it, sunk below, it seems to be looking at
heaven above from the infernal waters. Struck on its side by the waves,
it often sends forth a low crashing sound, and beaten against, it sounds
with no less noise, than on an occasion when the iron battering ram, or
the balista, is shaking the shattered towers. And as fierce lions are
wont, gaining strength in their career, to rush with their breasts upon
the weapons, and arms extended against them ; so the water, when
upon the rising of the winds it had rushed onwards, advanced against the
rigging of the ship, and was much higher than it. And now the bolts shrink, and despoiled of their covering of wax, 40 the seams open wide, and afford a passage to the 403 xi. 515-540. fatal waves. Behold! vast showers fall from the dissolving clouds, and
you would believe that the whole of the heavens is descending into the
deep, and that the swelling sea is ascending to the tracts of heaven.
The sails are wet with the rain, and the waves of the ocean are mingled
with the waters of the skies. The firmament is without its fires; and the gloomy night is oppressed both with its own darkness and
that of the storm. Yet the lightnings disperse these, and give light as
they flash; the waters are on fire with the flames of the thunder-bolts.
And now, too, the waves make an inroad into the hollow texture of the
ship; and as a soldier, superior to all the rest of the number, after he
has often sprung forward against the fortifications of a defended city,
at length gains his desires; and, inflamed with the desire of glory, though but one among a thousand more, he still mounts the wall,
so, when the violent waves have beaten against the lofty sides, the fury
of the tenth wave, 41 rising more impetuously than the rest ,
rushes onward; and it ceases not to attack the wearied ship, before it
descends within the walls, as it were, of the captured bark. Part, then,
of the sea is still attempting to get into the ship, part is within it.
All are now in alarm, with no less intensity than a city is wont to be
alarmed, while some are undermining the walls without, and others within
have possession of the walls. All art fails them, and their
courage sinks; and as many shapes of death seem to rush and to
break in upon them , as the waves that approach. One does not
refrain from tears; another is stupefied; another calls those happy 42 whom funeral rites 404 xi. 540-569. await; another, in his prayers, addresses the Gods, and lifting up his
hands in vain to that heaven which he sees not, implores their aid. His
brothers and his parent recur to the mind of another; to another, his
home, with his pledges of affection , and so what has been
left behind by each. The remembrance of Halcyone affects Ceyx; on the lips of Ceyx
there is nothing but Halcyone; and though her alone he regrets, still he
rejoices that she is absent. Gladly , too, would he look back to
the shore of his native land, and turn his last glance towards his home;
but he knows not where it is. The sea is raging in a hurricane 43 so
vast, and all the sky is concealed beneath the shade brought on by the
clouds of pitchy darkness, and the face of the night is redoubled in
gloom . The mast is broken by the violence of the drenching tempest;
the helm, too, is broken; and the undaunted wave, standing over its
spoil, looks down like a conqueror, upon the waves as they encircle below . Nor, when precipitated, does it rush down less violently,
than if any God were to hurl Athos or Pindus, torn up from its
foundations, into the open sea; and with its weight and its violence
together, it sinks the ship to the bottom. With her, a great part
of the crew overwhelmed in the deep water, and not rising again to the
air, meet their fate. Some seize hold of portions and broken pieces of
the ship. Ceyx himself seizes a fragment of the wreck, with that hand
with which he was wont to wield the sceptre, and in vain, alas!
he invokes his father, and his father-in-law. But chiefly on his lips,
as he swims, is his wife Halcyone. Her he thinks of, and her name he repeats: he prays the waves to impel his body before her eyes; and
that when dead he may be entombed by the hands of his friends. While he still swims, he calls upon Halcyone far away, as often as the
billows allow 44 him to open his mouth, and in the very waves he
murmurs her name . When , lo! a darkening arch 45 of
waters breaks over the middle of the waves, and buries his head sinking
beneath the bursting billow. 405 xi. 569-590. Lucifer was obscured that night, and such that you could not have
recognized him; and since he was not allowed to depart from the
heavens, 46 he concealed his face beneath thick clouds. In the meantime, the daughter of Æolus, ignorant of so great
misfortunes, reckons the nights; and now she hastens to prepare the garments 47 for him to put on, and now, those which, when he
comes, she herself may wear, and vainly promises herself his return.
She, indeed, piously offers frankincense to all the Gods above; but,
before all, she pays her adorations at the temple of Juno, and comes to
the altars on behalf of her husband, who is not in existence. And she
prays that her husband may be safe, and that he may return, and may
prefer no woman before her. But this last alone can be her lot,
out of so many of her wishes. But the Goddess endures not any longer to
be supplicated on behalf of one who is dead; and, that she may repel her
polluted hands 48 from the altars,—she says, “Iris, most
faithful messenger of my words, hasten quickly to the soporiferous court
of Sleep, and command him, under the form of Ceyx who is dead, to send a
vision to Halcyone, to relate her real misfortune.” Thus she
says. Iris assumes garment of a thousand colours, and, marking the
heavens 406 xi. 590-617. with her curving arch, she repairs to the abode of the king, Sleep , as bidden, concealed beneath a rock. There is near the Cimmerians 49 a cave with a long recess,
a hollowed mountain, the home and the habitation of slothful Sleep,
into which the Sun, whether rising, or in his mid course, or
setting, can never come. Fogs mingled with darkness are exhaled from the
ground, and it is a twilight with a dubious light. No wakeful
bird, with the notes of his crested features, there calls forth the
morn; nor do the watchful dogs, or the geese more sagacious 50 than
the dogs, break the silence with their voices. No wild beasts, no
cattle, no boughs waving with the breeze, no loud outbursts of
the human voice, there make any sound; mute Rest has there her
abode. But from the bottom of the rock runs a stream, the waters of
Lethe, 51 through which the rivulet, trickling with a
murmuring noise amid the sounding pebbles, invites sleep. Before the
doors of the cavern, poppies bloom in abundance, and innumerable herbs,
from the juice of which the humid night gathers sleep, and spreads it
over the darkened Earth. There is no door in the whole dwelling, to make
a noise by the turning of the hinges; no porter at the entrance. But in
the middle is a couch, raised high upon black ebony, stuffed with
feathers, of a dark colour, concealed by a dark coverlet; on which the
God himself lies, his limbs dissolved in sloth. Around him lie, in every
direction, imitating divers shapes, unsubstantial dreams as many as the
harvest bears ears of corn, the wood green leaves, the shore the sands
thrown up. Into this, soon as the maiden had entered, and had put aside
with her hands the visions that were 407 xi. 617-648. in her way, the sacred house shone with the splendour of her garment,
and the God, with difficulty lifting up his eyes sunk in languid sloth,
again and again relapsing, and striking the upper part of his breast
with his nodding chin, at last aroused himself from his dozing ;
and, raised on his elbow, he inquired why she had come; for he knew who she was . But she replied , “Sleep, thou repose of all things; Sleep,
thou gentlest of the Deities; thou peace of the mind, from which care
flies, who dost soothe the hearts of men , wearied with the toils
of the day, and refittest them for labour, command a vision, that
resembles in similitude the real shape, to go to Halcyone, in Herculean
Trachyn, in the form of the king, and to assume the form of one that has
suffered shipwreck. Juno commands this.” After Iris had executed her
commission, she departed; for she could no longer endure the effects of
the vapour; and, as soon as she perceived sleep creeping over her limbs,
she took to flight, 52 and departed along the bow by which she had
come just before. But Father Sleep , out of the multitude of his thousand sons,
raises Morpheus, 53 a skilful artist, and an imitator of any human shape. No one more dexterously than he mimics the gait,
and the countenance, and the mode of speaking; he adds the dress, too,
and the words most commonly used by any one. But he imitates men only;
for another one becomes a wild beast, becomes a bird, or becomes
a serpent, with its lengthened body: this one, the Gods above call
Icelos; the tribe of mortals, Phobetor. There is likewise a third, master of a different art, called Phantasos: he cleverly
changes himself into earth, and stone, and water, and a tree, and
all those things which are destitute of life. These are wont, by night,
to show their features to kings and to generals, while others
wander amid the people and the commonalty. These, Sleep, the aged God , passes by, and selects Morpheus alone from all his brothers,
to execute the commands of the daughter of Thaumas; and again he 408 xi. 648-684. both drops his head, sunk in languid drowsiness, and shrinks back within
the lofty couch. Morpheus flies through the dark with wings that make no noise,
and in a short space of intervening time arrives at the Hæmonian city;
and, laying aside his wings from off his body, he assumes the form of
Ceyx; and in that form, wan, and like one without blood, without
garments, he stands before the bed of his wretched wife. The beard of
the hero appears to be dripping, and the water to be falling thickly
from his soaking hair. Then leaning on the bed, with tears running down
his face, he says these words: “My most wretched wife, dost thou
recognise thy Ceyx, or are my looks so changed with death?
Observe me; thou wilt surely know me: and, instead of thy
husband, thou wilt find the ghost of thy husband. Thy prayers, Halcyone,
have availed me nothing; I have perished. Do not promise thyself, thus deceived, my return . The cloudy South wind caught my
ship in the Ægean Sea, 54 and dashed it to pieces, tossed by the mighty
blasts; and the waves choked my utterance, in vain calling upon thy
name. It is no untruthful messenger that tells thee this: thou dost not
hear these things through vague rumours. I, myself, shipwrecked, in
person, am telling thee my fate. Come, arise then, shed tears, and put
on mourning; and do not send me unlamented to the phantom realms
of Tartarus.” To these words Morpheus adds a voice, which she may believe to be
that of her husband. He seems, too, to be shedding real tears, and his
hands have the gesture of Ceyx. As she weeps, Halcyone groans aloud, and
moves her arms in her sleep, and catching at his body, grasps the air;
and she cries aloud, “Stay, whither dost thou hurry? We will go
together.” Disturbed by her own voice, and by the appearance of her
husband, she shakes off sleep; and first she looks about there, to see
if he, who has been so lately seen, is there; for the servants, roused
by her voice, have brought in lights. After she has found him nowhere,
she smites her face with her hands, and tears her garments from off her
breast, and beats her breast itself. Nor cares she to loosen her hair;
she tears it, and says to her nurse, as she inquires what is the
occasion 409 xi. 684-715. of her sorrow: “Halcyone is no more! no more! with her own Ceyx is she
dead. Away with words of comfort. He has perished by shipwreck.
I have seen him, and I knew him; and as he departed, desirous to
detain him, I extended my hands towards him. The ghost fled: but,
yet it was the undoubted and the real ghost of my husband. It had not,
indeed, if thou askest me that , his wonted features; nor was he
looking cheerful with his former countenance. Hapless, I beheld
him, pale, and naked, and with his hair still dripping. Lo! ill-fated man , he stood on this very spot;” and she seeks the prints of his
footsteps, if any are left. “This it was, this is what I dreaded in my
ill-boding mind, and I entreated that thou wouldst not, deserting me,
follow the winds. But, I could have wished, since thou didst depart
to perish, that, at least, thou hadst taken me as well. To have gone
with thee, yes , with thee, would have been an advantage to me;
for then neither should I have spent any part of my life otherwise than
together with thee, nor would my death have been divided from
thee . Now, absent from thee , I perish; now, absent,
I am tossed on the waves; and the sea has thee without me. “My heart were more cruel than the sea itself, were I to strive to
protract my life any further; and, were I to struggle to survive so
great a misfortune. But I will not struggle, nor, hapless one, will I
abandon thee; and, at least, I will now come to be thy
companion. And, in the tomb, if the urn does not, yet the
inscription 55 shall unite us: if I touch not thy bones
with my bones, still will I unite thy name with my name.” Grief forbids
her saying more, and wailings come between each word, and groans are
heaved from her sorrow-stricken breast. It is now morning: she goes forth from her abode to the
sea-shore, and, wretched, repairs to that place from which she had seen
him go, and says, “While he lingered, and while he was loosening the
cables, at his departure, he gave me kisses upon this sea-shore;” and
while she calls to recollection the incidents which she had observed
with her eyes, and looks 410 xi. 715-747. out upon the sea, she observes on the flowing wave, I know not what object , like a body, within a distant space: and at first she is
doubtful what it is. After the water has brought it a little nearer,
and, although it is still distant, it is plain that it is a
corpse. Ignorant who it may be, because it is ship-wrecked, she is moved
at the omen, and, though unknown, would fain give it a tear. “Alas! thou
wretched one!” she says, “whoever thou art; and if thou hast any wife!”
Driven by the waves, the body approaches nearer. The more she looks at
it, the less and the less is she mistress of her senses. And now she
sees it brought close to the land, that now she can well distinguish it:
it is her husband. “’Tis he!” she exclaims, and, on the instant, she
tears her face, her hair, and her garments; and, extending her
trembling hands towards Ceyx, she says, “And is it thus, Oh dearest
husband! is it thus, Oh ill-fated one! that thou dost return
to me?” A mole, made by the hand of man, adjoins the waves, which breaks the
first fury of the ocean, and weakens the first shock of its waters. Upon
that she leaped, and ’tis wondrous that she could. She flew, and beating
the light air with her wings newly formed, she, a wretched bird,
skimmed the surface of the water. And, while she flew, her croaking
mouth, with its slender bill, uttered a sound like that of one in
sadness, and full of complaining. But when she touched the body, dumb,
and without blood, embracing the beloved limbs with her new-made wings,
in vain she gave him cold kisses with her hardened bill. The people were
in doubt whether Ceyx was sensible of this, or whether, by the motion of
the wave, he seemed to raise his countenance; but really he was
sensible of it; and, at length, through the pity of the Gods above, both
were changed into birds. Meeting with the same fate, even then their
love remained. Nor, when now birds, is the conjugal tie
dissolved: they couple, and they become parents; and for seven calm
days, 56 in the winter-time, does Halcyone brood upon her
nest floating on the sea. 57 Then the passage of the deep is
safe; 411 xi. 747-754. Æolus keeps the winds in, and restrains them from sallying forth, and
secures a smooth sea for his descendants. EXPLANATION. According to the testimony of several of the ancient writers, Ceyx was
the king of Trachyn, and was a prince of great knowledge and experience;
and many had recourse to him to atone for the murders which they had
committed, whether through imprudence or otherwise. Pausanias says that
Eurystheus having summoned Ceyx to deliver up to him the children of
Hercules, that prince, who was not able to maintain a war against so
powerful a king, sent the youths to Theseus, who took them into his
protection. To recover from the melancholy consequent upon the death of his brother
Dædalion and his niece Chione, he went to Claros to consult the oracle
of Apollo, and was shipwrecked on his return; on which, his wife,
Halcyone, was so afflicted, that she died of grief, or else threw
herself into the sea, as Hyginus informs us. It was said that they were
changed into the birds which we call kingfishers, a story which,
probably, has no other foundation than the name of Halcyone, which
signifies that bird; which by the ancients was considered to be the
symbol of conjugal affection. Apollodorus, however, does not give us so favourable an idea of the
virtue of these persons as Ovid has done. According to him, it was their
pride which proved the cause of their destruction. Jupiter enraged at
Ceyx, because he had assumed his name as Halcyone had done that of Juno,
changed them both into birds, he becoming a cormorant, and she a
kingfisher. This story is remarkable for the beautiful and affecting
manner in which it is told. FABLE VIII. The Nymph Hesperia flying from Æsacus,
who is enamoured of her, is bitten by a serpent, and instantly dies from
the effects of the wound. He is so afflicted at her death, that he
throws himself into the sea, and is transformed into a didapper. Some old man 58 observes them as they fly over the widely extended
seas, and commends their love, preserved to the end of their
existence . One, close by, or the same, if chance so orders it, says,
“This one, too, which you see, as it cuts through the sea, and having
its legs drawn up,” pointing at a didapper, with its wide throat, “was
the son of a king. 412 xi . 754-786. And, if you want to come down to him in one lengthened series, his
ancestors are Ilus, and Assaracus, and Ganymede, 59 snatched away by
Jupiter, and the aged Laomedon, and Priam, to whom were allotted the
last days of Troy. He himself was the brother of Hector, and had he not
experienced a strange fate in his early youth, perhaps he would have had
a name not inferior to that of Hector; although the daughter of
Dymas bore this last . Alexirhoë, the daughter of the two-horned
Granicus, 60 is said secretly to have brought forth Æsacus, under
shady Ida. “He loathed the cities, and distant from the splendid court,
frequented the lonely mountains, and the unambitious fields; nor went
but rarely among the throngs of Ilium. Yet, not having a breast either
churlish, or impregnable to love, he espies Hesperie, the daughter of
Cebrenus, 61 on the banks of her sire, who has been often sought
by him throughout all the woods, drying her locks, thrown over her
shoulders, in the sun. The Nymph, thus seen, takes to flight,
just as the frightened hind from the tawny wolf; and as the
water-duck, surprised at a distance, having left her wonted stream, from the hawk. Her the Trojan hero pursues, and, swift with
love, closely follows her, made swift by fear. Behold! a snake,
lurking in the grass, with its barbed sting, wounds her foot as she
flies, and leaves its venom in her body. With her flight is her life cut
short. Frantic, he embraces her breathless, and cries aloud,—
“I grieve, I grieve that ever I pursued thee .
But I did not apprehend this; nor was it of so much value to me to
conquer. We two have proved the destruction of wretched thee. The wound
was given by the serpent; by me was the occasion given. I should be
more guilty than he, did I not give the consolation for thy fate by my
own death.” Thus he said; and from a rock which the hoarse waves
had undermined, he hurled himself into the sea. Tethys, pitying him as
he fell, received him softly, and covered him with feathers as he swam
through the sea; and the power of obtaining 413 xi. 786-795. the death he sought was not granted to him. The lover is vexed that,
against his will, he is obliged to live on, and that opposition is made
to his spirit, desirous to depart from its wretched abode. And, as he
has assumed newformed wings on his shoulders, he flies aloft, and again
he throws his body in the waves: his feathers break the fall. Æsacus is
enraged; and headlong he plunges into the deep, 62 and incessantly
tries the way of destruction. Love caused his leanness; the spaces
between the joints of his legs are long; his neck remains long, and his head is far away from his body. He loves the sea, and has
his name because he plunges 63 in it. EXPLANATION. Ovid and Apollodorus agree that Æsacus was the son of Priam, and that he
was changed into a didapper, or diver, but they differ in the other
circumstances of his life. Instead of being the son of Alexirhoë,
Apollodorus says that he was the son of Priam and Arisbe the daughter of
Merope, his first wife; that his father made him marry Sterope, who
dying very young, he was so afflicted at her death, that he threw
himself into the sea. He also says that Priam having repudiated Arisbe
to marry Hecuba, the daughter of Cisseus, Æsacus seeing his
mother-in-law pregnant of her second son, foretold his father that her
progeny would be the cause of a bloody war, which would end in the
destruction of the kingdom of Troy; and that upon this prediction, the
infant, when born, was exposed on Mount Ida. Tzetzes adds, that Æsacus told his father that it was absolutely
necessary to put to death both the mother and the infant which was born
on that same day; on which Priam being informed that Cilla, the wife of
Thymætes, being delivered on that day of a son, he ordered them both to
be killed; thinking thereby to escape the realization of the prediction.
Servius, on the authority of Euphorion, relates the story in much the
same manner; but a poet quoted by Cicero in his first book on
Divination, says that it was the oracle of Zelia, a little town at
the foot of Mount Ida, which gave that answer as an interpretation of
the dream of Hecuba. Pausanias says it was the sibyl Herophila who
interpreted the dream, while other ancient writers state that it was
Cassandra. Apollodorus says that Æsacus learned from his grandfather
Merops the art of foretelling things to come. 1. Berecynthian pipe. ]—Ver. 16. This pipe, made of box-wood,
was much used in the rites of Cybele, or Berecynthia. 2. Doomed to die. ]—Ver. 26. The Romans were wont to exhibit
shows of hunting in the amphitheatre in the morning; and at mid-day the
gladiatorial spectacles commenced. The ‘arena’ was the name given to the
central open space, which derived its name from the sand with which it
was covered, chiefly for the purpose of absorbing the blood of the wild
beasts and of the combatants. Caligula, Nero, and Carus showed their
extravagant disposition by using cinnabar and borax instead of sand. In
the earlier amphitheatres there were ditches, called ‘Euripi,’ between
the open space, or arena, and the seats, to defend the spectators from
the animals. They were introduced by Julius Cæsar, but were filled up by
Nero, to gain space for the spectators. Those who fought with the beasts
(as it will be remembered St. Paul did at Ephesus) were either condemned
criminals or captives, or persons who did so for pay, being trained for
the purpose. Lucius Metellus was the first that we read of who
introduced wild beasts in the theatre for the amusement of the public.
He exhibited in the Circus one hundred and forty-two elephants, which he
brought from Sicily, after his victory over the Carthaginians, and which
are said to have been slain, more because the Romans did not know what
to do with them, than for the amusement of the public. Lions and
panthers were first exhibited by M. Fulvius, after the Ætolian war.
In the Circensian games, exhibited by the Curule Ædiles,
P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica, and P. Lentulus, B.C. 168, there were sixty-three African panthers
and forty bears and elephants. These latter animals were sometimes
introduced to fight with bulls. Sylla, when Prætor, exhibited one
hundred lions, which were pierced with javelins. We also read of
hippopotami and crocodiles being introduced for the same purpose, while
cameleopards were also hunted in the games given by Julius Caesar in his
third consulship. He also introduced bull fights, and Augustus first
exhibited the rhinoceros, and a serpent, fifty cubits in length. When
Titus constructed his great amphitheatre, five thousand wild beasts and
four thousand tame animals were slain; while in the games celebrated by
Trajan, after his victories over the Dacians, eleven thousand animals
are said to have been killed. For further information on this subject,
the reader is referred to the article ‘Venatio,’ in Smith’s Dictionary
of Greek and Roman Antiquities, which valuable work contains a large
quantity of interesting matter on this barbarous practice of the
Romans. 3. Into the breezes. ]—Ver. 43. ‘In ventos anima exhalata
recessit’ is rendered by Clarke— ‘his life breathed out, marches
off into the wind.’ 4. Limbs lie scattered. ]—Ver. 50. The limbs of Orpheus were
collected by the Muses, and, according to Pausanias, were buried by them
in Dium in Macedonia, while his head was carried to Lesbos. 5. Methymnæan Lesbos. ]—Ver. 55. Methymna was a town in the
isle of Lesbos, famed for its wines. 6. Side by side. ]—Ver. 64. ‘Conjunctis passibus’ means ‘at an
equal pace, and side by side.’ 7. Springing forward. ]—Ver. 78. ‘Exsultantem’ is rendered by
Clarke, ‘bouncing hard to get away.’ 8. Eumolpus. ]—Ver. 93. There were three celebrated persons of
antiquity named Eumolpus. The first was a Thracian, the son of Neptune
and Chione, who lived in the time of Erectheus, king of Athens, against
whom he led the people of Eleusis, and who established the Eleusinian
mysteries. Some of his posterity settling at Athens, the Eumolpus here
named was born there. He was the son of Musæus and the disciple of
Orpheus. The third Eumolpus is supposed to have lived between the times
of the two already named. 9. Berecynthian hero. ]—Ver. 106. Midas is so called from mount
Berecynthus in Phrygia. 10. Sardis. ]—Ver. 137. The city of Sardis was the capital of
Lydia, where Crœsus had his palace. The river Pactolus flowed through
it. 11. Obtuse understanding. ]—Ver. 148. ‘Pingue sed ingenium
mansit,’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘but he continued a blockhead
still.’ 12. Tmolus. ]—Ver. 156. This was the tutelary divinity of the
mountain of Tmolus, or Tymolus. 13. Soaked in Tyrian purple. ]—Ver. 166. Being saturated with
Tyrian purple, the garment would be ‘dibaphus,’ or ‘twice dipt;’ being
first dyed in the grain, and again when woven. Of course, these were the
most valuable kind of cloths. 14. Rhœtæum. ]—Ver. 197. Sigæum and Rhœtæum were two
promontories, near Troy, between which was an altar dedicated to Jupiter
Panomphæus. 15. Panomphæan. ]—Ver. 198. Jupiter had the title ‘Panomphæus,’
from πᾶν , ‘all,’ and ὀμφὴ , ‘the voice,’ either because
he was worshipped by the voices of all, or because he was the author of
all prophecy. 16. Build the walls. ]—Ver. 204. It has been suggested that the
story of Laomedon obtaining the aid of Neptune in building the walls of
Troy, only meant that he built it of bricks made of clay mixed with
water, and dried in the sun. 17. His father-in-law. ]—Ver. 219. Nereus, the father of Thetis;
was a Divinity of the sea, and was gifted with the power of
prophecy. 30. The extreme summit. ]—Ver. 393. The upper stories of the
ancient light-houses had windows looking towards the sea; and torches,
or fires (probably in cressets, or fire-pans, at the end of poles), were
kept burning on them by night, to guide vessels. ‘Pharos,’ or ‘Pharus,’
the name given to light-houses, is derived from the celebrated one built
on the island of Pharos, at the entrance of the port of Alexandria. It
was erected by Sostratus, of Cnidos, at the expense of one of the
Ptolemies, and cost 800 talents. It was of huge dimensions, square, and
constructed of white stone. It contained many stories, and diminished in
width from below upwards. There were ‘phari,’ or ‘light-houses,’ at
Ostia, Ravenna, Capreæ, and Brundisium. 31. The Magnetes . ]—Ver. 408. The Magnetes were the
people of Magnesia, a district of Thessaly. They were famed for
their skill in horsemanship. 32. Hæmonian Acastus. ]—Ver. 409. Acastus was the son of Pelias.
His wife Hippolyta, being enamoured of Peleus, and he not encouraging
her advances, she accused him of having made an attempt on her virtue.
On this, Acastus determined upon his death; and having taken him to
Mount Pelion, on the pretext of hunting, he took away his arms, and left
him there, to be torn to pieces by the wild beasts. Mercury, or,
according to some, Chiron, came to his assistance, and gave him a sword
made by Vulcan, with which he slew Acastus and his wife. 18. Embraces of Thetis. ]—Ver. 226. Fulgentius suggests, that
the meaning of this is, that Jupiter, or fire, will not unite with
Thetis, who represents water. 19. Son of Æacus. ]—Ver. 227. Peleus was the son of Æacus, who
was the son of Jupiter, by Ægina, the daughter of Æsopus. 20. Upon its waters. ]—Ver. 247. While libations were made to
the other Divinities, either on their altars, or on the ground, the
marine Deities were so honoured by pouring wine on the waves of the
sea. 21. Carpathian. ]—Ver. 249. The Carpathian sea was so called
from the Isle of Carpathus, which lay between the island of Rhodes and
the Egyptian coast. 22. Trachinian land. ]—Ver. 269. Apollodorus says, that Peleus,
when exiled, repaired to Phthia, and not to the city of Trachyn. 23. Symbols of peace. ]—Ver. 276. The ‘velamenta’ were branches
of olive, surrounded with bandages of wool, which were held in the hands
of those who begged for mercy or pardon. The wool covering the hand was
emblematical of peace, the hand being thereby rendered powerless to
effect mischief. 24. Who summons forth. ]—Ver. 296. This is a periphrasis for
Lucifer, or the Morning Star, which precedes, and appears to summon the
dawn. 25. Thisbean doves. ]—Ver. 300. Thisbe was a town of Bœotia, so
called from Thisbe, the daughter of Æsopus. It was famous for the number
of doves which it produced. 26. Father’s skill. ]—Ver. 314. Being the son of Mercury, who
was noted for his thieving propensities. 27. Her ancestor. ]—Ver. 319. Jupiter was the great-grandfather
of Chione, being the father of Lucifer, and the grandfather of
Dædalion. 28. By our deeds. ]—Ver. 323. This is said sarcastically, as
much as to say, ‘If I do not please her by my looks, at least I will by
my actions.’ 29. The Œtæan king. ]—Ver. 383. Namely, Ceyx, the king of
Trachyn, which city Hercules had founded, at the foot of Mount Œta. 33. The profane Phorbas. ]—Ver. 414. The temple at Delphi was
much nearer and more convenient for Ceyx to resort to; but at that
period it was in the hands of the Phlegyans, a people of Thessaly,
of predatory and lawless habits, who had plundered the Delphic shrine.
They were destroyed by thunderbolts and pestilence, or, according to
some authors, by Neptune, who swept them away in a flood. Phorbas, here
mentioned, was one of the Lapithæ, a savage robber, who forced
strangers to box with him, and then slew them. Having the presumption to
challenge the Gods, he was slain by Apollo. 34. Names upon tombs. ]—Ver. 429. Cenotaphs, or honorary tombs,
were erected in honour of those, who having been drowned, their bodies
could not be found. One great reason for erecting these memorials was
the notion, that the souls of those who had received no funeral honours,
wandered in agony on the banks of the Styx for the space of one hundred
years. 35. Hippotas. ]—Ver. 431. Æolus was the grandson of Hippotas,
through his daughter Sergesta, who bore Æolus to Jupiter. Ovid says that
he was the father of Halcyone; but, according to Lucian, she was the
daughter of Æolus the Hellenian, the grandson of Deucalion. 36. Brilliant fires. ]—Ver. 436. Ovid probably here had in view
the description given by Lucretius, commencing Book i. line
272. 37. In double rows. ]—Ver. 462. By this it is implied that the
ship of Ceyx was a ‘biremis,’ or one with two ranks of rowers; one rank
being placed above the other. Pliny the Elder attributes the invention
of the ‘biremis’ to the Erythræans. Those with three ranks of rowers
were introduced by the Corinthians; while Dionysius, the first king of
Sicily, was the inventor of the Quadriremis, or ship with four ranks of
rowers. Quinqueremes, or those with five ranks, are said to have been
the invention of the Salaminians. The first use of those with six ranks
has been ascribed to the Syracusans. Ships were sometimes built with
twelve, twenty, and even forty ranks of rowers, but they appear to have
been intended rather for curiosity than for use. As, of course, the
labour of each ascending rank increased, through the necessity of the
higher ranks using longer oars, the pay of the lowest rank was the
lowest, their work being the easiest. Where there were twenty ranks or
more, the upper oars required more than one man to manage them. Ptolemy
Philopater had a vessel built as a curiosity, which had no less than
four thousand rowers. 38. Towards their sides. ]—Ver. 475. ‘Obvertere lateri remos’
most probably means ‘To feather the oars,’ which it is especially
necessary to do in a gale, to avoid the retarding power of the wind
against the surface of the blade of the oar. 39. Fixes the sail-yards. ]—Ver. 476. ‘Cornua’ means, literally,
‘The ends or points of the sail-yards ,’ or ‘Antennæ:’ but here the word is used to signify
the sail-yards themselves. 40. Covering of wax. ]—Ver. 514. The ‘Cera’ with which the seams
of the ships were stopped, was most probably a composition of wax and
pitch, or other bituminous and resinous substances. 41. The tenth wave. ]—Ver. 530. This is said in allusion to the
belief that every tenth wave exceeded the others in violence. 42. Calls those happy. ]—Ver. 540. Those who died on shore would
obtain funeral rites; while those who perished by shipwreck might become
food for the fishes, a fate which was regarded by the ancients with
peculiar horror. Another reason for thus regarding death by shipwreck,
was the general belief among the ancients, that the soul was an
emanation from æther, or fire, and that it was contrary to the laws of
nature for it to be extinguished by water. Ovid says in his Tristia, or
Lament (Book I. El. 2, l. 51-57), ‘I fear not death: ’tis the dreadful kind of
death; Take away the shipwreck: then death will be a gain to me. ’Tis
something for one, either dying a natural death, or by the sword, to lay
his breathless corpse in the firm ground, and to impart his wishes to
his kindred, and to hope for a sepulchre, and not to be food for the
fishes of the sea.’ 43. A hurricane. ]—Ver. 548-9. ‘Tanta vertigine pontus Fervet’
is transcribed by Clarke, ‘The sea is confounded with so great a
vertigo.’ 44. The billows allow. ]—Ver. 566. ‘Quoties sinit hiscere
fluctus’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘As oft as the waves suffer him to
gape.’ 45. A darkening arch. ]—Ver. 568. Possibly ‘niger arcus’ means a
sweeping wave, black with the sand which it has swept from the depths of
the ocean; or else with the reflection of the dark clouds. 46. From the heavens. ]—Ver. 571. The word Olympus is frequently
used by the poets to signify ‘the heavens;’ as the mountain of that name
in Thessaly, from its extreme height, was supposed to be the abode of
the Gods. 47. Prepare the garments. ]—Ver. 575. Horace tells us that their
clients wove garments for the Roman patricians; and the females of noble
family did the same for their husbands, children, and brothers. Ovid, in
the Fasti, describes Lucretia as making a ‘lacerna,’ or cloak, for her
husband Collatinus. She says to her hand-maidens, ‘With all speed there
must be sent to your master a cloak made with our hands.’ (Book ii.
l. 746.) Suetonius tells us that Augustus would wear no clothes but
those made by his wife, sister, or daughter. 48. Polluted hands. ]—Ver. 584. All persons who had been engaged
in the burial of the dead were considered to be polluted, and were not
allowed to enter the temples of the Gods till they had been purified.
Among the Greeks, persons who had been supposed to have died in foreign
countries, and whose funeral rites had been performed in an honorary
manner by their own relatives, if it turned out that they were not dead,
and they returned to their own country, were considered impure, and were
only purified by being dressed in swaddling clothes, and treated like
new-born infants. We shall, then, be hardly surprised at Juno
considering Halcyone to be polluted by the death of her husband Ceyx,
although at a distance, and as yet unknown to her. 49. The Cimmerians. ]—Ver. 592. Ovid appropriately places the
abode of the drowsy God in the cold, damp, and foggy regions of the
Cimmerians, who are supposed, by some authors, to have been a people of
Sarmatia, or Scythia, near the Palus Mæotis, or sea of Azof. Other
writers suppose that a fabulous race of people, said to live near Baiæ
in Italy, and to inhabit dark caves throughout the day, while they
sallied forth to plunder at night, are here referred to. This
description of the abode of Sleep, and of his appearance and attendants,
is supposed to have been borrowed by Ovid from one of the Greek
poets. 50. Geese more sagacious. ]—Ver. 599. This is said in compliment
to the geese, for the service they rendered, in giving the alarm, and
saving the Capitol, when in danger of being taken by the Gauls. 51. Waters of Lethe. ]—Ver. 603. After the dead had tasted the
waters of Lethe, one of the rivers of Hell, it was supposed that they
lost all recollection of the events of their former life. 52. Took to flight. ]—Ver. 632. Clarke translates this line,
‘Away she scours, and returns through the bow through which she had
come.’ 53. Morpheus. ]—Ver. 635. Morpheus was so called from the Greek μορφὴ , ‘shape,’ or
‘figure,’ because he assumed various shapes. Icelos has his name from
the Greek ἴκελος , ‘like,’
for a similar reason. Phobetor is from the Greek φοβὸς , ‘fear,’ because it was his office to
terrify mortals. Lucian appears to mean the same Deity, under the name
of Taraxion. Phantasos is from the Greek φάντασις , ‘fancy.’ 54. In the Ægean Sea. ]—Ver . 663. The Ægean Sea lay between the city of Trachyn and
the coast of Ionia, whither Ceyx had gone. 55. The inscription. ]—Ver. 706. The epitaphs on the tombs of
the ancients usually contained the name of the person, his age, and
(with the Greeks) some account of the principal events of his life.
Halcyone, in her affectionate grief, promises her husband, at least, an
honorary funeral, and a share in her own epitaph . 56. Seven calm days. ]—Ver. 745. Simonides mentions eleven as
being the number of the days; Philochorus, nine; but Demagoras says
seven, the number here adopted by Ovid. 57. Floating on the sea. ]—Ver. 746. The male of the kingfisher
was said by the ancients to be so constant to his mate, that on her
death he refused to couple with any other, for which reason the poets
considered that bird as the emblem of conjugal affection. The sea was
supposed to be always calm when the female was sitting; from which time
of serenity, our proverb, which speaks of ‘Halcyon days,’ takes its
rise. 58. Some old man. ]—Ver. 749-50. ‘Hos aliquis
senior—spectat;’ these words are translated by Clarke, ‘Some old
blade spies them.’ 59. Ganymede. ]—Ver. 756. Ovid need not have inserted Assaracus
and Ganymede, as they were only the brothers of Ilus, and the three were
the sons of Tros. Ilus was the father of Laomedon, whose son was Priam,
the father of Æsacus. 60. Granicus. ]—Ver. 763. The Granicus was a river of Mysia,
near which Alexander the Great defeated Darius with immense
slaughter. 61. Cebrenus. ]—Ver. 769. The Cebrenus was a little stream of
Phrygia, not far from Troy. 62. Plunges into the deep. ]—Ver. 791-2. ‘Inque profundum Pronus
abit,’ Clarke renders, ‘Goes plumb down into the deep.’ Certainly this
is nearer to its French origin, ‘a plomb,’ than the present form, ‘plump
down;’ but, like many other instances in his translation, it decidedly
does not help us, as he professes to do, to ‘the attainment of the
elegancy of this great Poet.’ 63. Because he plunges. ]—Ver. 795. He accounts for the Latin
name of the diver, or didapper, ‘mergus,’ by saying that it was so
called, ‘a mergendo,’ from its diving, which doubtless was the origin of
the name, though not taking its rise in the fiction here related by the
Poet . 414 BOOK THE TWELFTH. FABLES I. AND II. The Greeks assemble their troops at
Aulis, to proceed against the city of Troy, and revenge the rape of
Helen; but the fleet is detained in port by contrary winds. Calchas, the
priest, after a prediction concerning the success of the expedition,
declares that the weather will never be favourable till Agamemnon shall
have sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia. She is immediately led to the
altar for that purpose; but Diana, appeased by this act of obedience,
carries away the maiden, and substitutes a hind in her place, on which a
fair wind arises. Upon the Greeks landing at Troy, a battle is
fought, in which Protesilaüs is killed by Hector, and Achilles kills
Cygnus, a Trojan, on which his father Neptune transforms him into a
swan. His father Priam mourned him, not knowing that Æsacus, having assumed
wings, was still living; Hector, too, with his brothers, made
unavailing offerings 1 at a tomb, that bore his name on it . The
presence of Paris was wanting, at this mournful office: who, soon after,
brought into his country a lengthened war, together with a ravished
wife; 2 and a thousand ships 3 uniting together, followed him,
and, together with them , the whole body 4 of the Pelasgian
nation. Nor would vengeance have been delayed, had not the raging winds
made the seas impassable, and the Bœotian land detained in fishy Aulis
the ships ready to depart. Here, when they had prepared a 415 xii. 11-44. sacrifice to Jupiter, after the manner of their country, as the ancient
altar was heated with kindled fires, the Greeks beheld an azure-coloured
serpent creep into a plane tree, which was standing near the sacrifice
they had begun. There was on the top of the tree a nest of twice four
birds, which the serpent seized 5 together, and the dam as she
fluttered around the scene of her loss, and he buried them in his
greedy maw. All stood amazed. But Calchas , the son of Thestor,
a soothsayer, foreseeing the truth, says, “Rejoice, Pelasgians, we
shall conquer. Troy will fall, but the continuance of our toil will be
long;” and he allots the nine birds to the years of the war. The
serpent , just as he is, coiling around the green branches in the
tree, becomes a stone, and, under the form of a serpent, retains that
stone form . Nereus continued boisterous in the Ionian waves, and did not impel
the sails onwards; and there are some who think that Neptune favoured
Troy, because he made the walls of the city. But not so the son
of Thestor. For neither was he ignorant, nor did he conceal, that the
wrath of the virgin Goddess must be appeased by the blood of a virgin.
After the public good had prevailed over affection, and the king over
the father, and Iphigenia, ready to offer her chaste blood, stood before
the altar, while the priests were weeping; the Goddess was appeased, and
cast a mist before their eyes, and, amid the service and the hurry of
the rites, and the voices of the suppliants, is said to have changed
Iphigenia, the Mycenian maiden, for a substituted hind. Wherefore, when
the Goddess was appeased by a death which was more fitting, and
at the same moment the wrath of Phœbe, and of the sea was past, the
thousand ships received the winds astern, and having suffered much, they
gained the Phrygian shore. There is a spot in the middle of the world, between the land and the
sea, and the regions of heaven, the confines of the threefold universe,
whence is beheld whatever anywhere exists, although it may be in far distant regions, and every sound pierces the hollow ears. Of
this place Fame is possessed, and chooses for herself a habitation
on the top 6 of a tower, and 416 xii. 45-78. has added innumerable avenues, and a thousand openings to her house, and
has closed the entrances with no gates. Night and day are they open. It
is all of sounding brass; it is all resounding, and it reechoes the
voice, and repeats what it hears. Within there is no rest, and silence
in no part. Nor yet is there a clamour, but the murmur of a low voice,
such as is wont to arise from the waves of the sea, if one listens at a
distance, or like the sound which the end of the thundering makes when Jupiter has clashed the black clouds together. A crowd
occupies the hall; the fickle vulgar come and go; and a thousand
rumours, false mixed with true, wander up and down, and circulate
confused words. Of these, some fill the empty ears with conversation;
some are carrying elsewhere what is told them; the measure of the
fiction is ever on the increase, and each fresh narrator adds something
to what he has heard. There, is Credulity, there, rash Mistake, and
empty Joy, and alarmed Fears, and sudden Sedition, and Whispers of
doubtful origin. She sees what things are done in heaven and on the sea,
and on the earth; and she pries into the whole universe. She has made it known that Grecian ships are on their way, with
valiant troops: nor does the enemy appear in arms unlooked for. The
Trojans oppose their landing, and defend the shore, and thou,
Protesilaüs, 7 art, by the decrees of fate, the first to fall by the
spear of Hector; 8 and the battles now commenced, and the
courageous spirits of the Trojans , and Hector, till then unknown, cost the Greeks dear. Nor do the Phrygians experience at small
expense of blood what the Grecian right hand can do. And now the Sigæan
shores are red with blood : now Cygnus, the son of Neptune, has
slain a thousand men. Now is Achilles pressing on in his chariot, and
levelling the Trojan ranks, with the blow of his Peleian spear; and
seeking through the lines either Cygnus or Hector, he engages with
Cygnus: Hector is reserved for the tenth year. Then animating the
horses, having their 417 xii. 78-105. white necks pressed with the yoke, he directed his chariot against the
enemy, and brandishing his quivering spear with his arm, he said,
“O youth, whoever thou art, take this consolation in thy death,
that thou art slain by the Hæmonian Achilles.” Thus far the grandson of Æacus. His heavy lance followed his words.
But, although there was no missing in the unerring lance, yet it availed
nothing, by the sharpness of its point, thus discharged; and as
it only bruised his breast with a blunt stroke, the other said,
“Thou son of a Goddess, (for by report have we known of thee beforehand)
why art thou surprised that wounds are warded off from me? (for Achilles was surprised); not this helmet that thou seest tawny
with the horse’s mane, nor the hollowed shield, the burden of my left
arm, are assistant to me; from them ornament alone is sought; for
this cause, too, Mars is wont to take up arms. All the assistance of
defensive armour shall be removed, and yet I shall come off
unhurt. It is something to be born, not of a Nereid, 9 but of
one who rules both Nereus and his daughter, and the whole
ocean.” Thus he spoke; and he hurled against the descendant of Æacus
his dart, destined to stick in the rim of his shield; it broke through
both the brass and the next nine folds of bull’s hide; but stopping in
the tenth circle of the hide , the hero wrenched it out, and again
hurled the quivering weapon with a strong hand; again his body was
without a wound, and unharmed, nor was a third spear able even to
graze Cygnus, unprotected, and exposing himself. Achilles raged no
otherwise than as a bull, 10 in the open Circus, 11 when
with his dreadful horns he butts against the purple-coloured garments,
used as the means of provoking him, and perceives that his wounds are
evaded. Still, he examines whether the point has chanced to fall 418 xii. 105-132. from off the spear. It is still adhering to the shaft. “My hand
then is weak,” says he, “and it has spent all the strength it had
before, upon one man. For decidedly it was strong enough, both when at
first I overthrew the walls of Lyrnessus, or when I filled both Tenedos
and Eëtionian 12 Thebes with their own blood. Or when Caÿcus 13 flowed empurpled with the slaughter of its people: and Telephus 14 was
twice sensible of the virtue of my spear. Here, too, where so many have
been slain, heaps of whom I both have made along this shore, and I now behold, my right hand has proved mighty, and is mighty.” Thus he spoke; and as if he distrusted what he had done
before, he hurled his spear against Menœtes, one of the Lycian
multitude, 15 who was standing opposite, and he tore
asunder both his coat of mail, and his breast beneath it. He beating the
solid earth with his dying head, he drew the same weapon from out of the
reeking wound, and said, “This is the hand, this the lance, with which I
conquered but now. The same will I use against him; in his case ,
I pray that the event may prove the same.” Thus he said, and he
hurled it at Cygnus, nor did the ashen lance miss him; and, not escaped by him , it resounded on his left shoulder: thence it was
repelled, as though by a wall, or a solid rock. Yet Achilles saw Cygnus
marked with blood, where he had been struck, and he rejoiced, but
in vain. There was no wound; that was the blood of Menœtes. Then indeed, raging, he leaps headlong from his lofty chariot, and
hand to hand, with his gleaming sword striking at his fearless foe, he
perceives that the shield and the helmet are pierced with his sword, and
that his weapon, too, is blunted upon his hard body. He endures it no
longer; and drawing back his 419 xii. 133-145. shield, he three or four times strikes the face of the hero, and his
hollow temples, with the hilt of the sword; and following, he presses
onward as the other gives ground, and confounds him, and drives him on,
and gives him no respite in his confusion. Horror seizes on him, and
darkness swims before his eyes; and as he moves backwards his retreating
steps, a stone in the middle of the field stands in his way.
Impelled over this, with his breast upwards, Achilles throws Cygnus with
great violence, and dashes him 16 to the earth. Then, pressing down
his breast with his shield and his hard knees, he draws tight the straps
of his helmet; which, fastened beneath his pressed chin, squeeze close
his throat, and take away his respiration and the passage of his
breath. He is preparing to strip his vanquished foe ; he sees nothing but his armour, left behind. The God of the Ocean changed
his body into a white bird, of which he so lately bore the
name. EXPLANATION. It is not improbable that the prediction of Calchas, at Aulis, that the
war against Troy would endure nine years, had no other foundation than
his desire to check an enterprise which must be attended with much
bloodshed, and difficulties of the most formidable nature. It is not
unlikely, too, that this interpretation of the story of the serpent
devouring the birds may have been planned by some of the Grecian
generals, who did not dare openly to refuse their assistance to
Agamemnon. The story of Iphigenia was, perhaps, founded on a similar
policy. The ancient poets and historians are by no means agreed as to
the fate of Iphigenia, as some say that she really was sacrificed, while
others state that she was transformed into a she-bear, others into an
old woman, and Nicander affirms that she was changed into a heifer. There is no story more celebrated among the ancients than that of the
intended immolation of Iphigenia. Euripides wrote two tragedies on the
subject. Homer, however, makes no allusion to the story of Iphigenia;
but he mentions Iphianassa, the daughter of Agamemnon, who was sent for,
to be a hostage on his reconciliation with Achilles; she is probably the
same person that is meant by the later poets, under the name of
Iphigenia. It has been suggested by some modern commentators, that the story of
Iphigenia was founded on the sacrifice of his own daughter, by Jeptha,
the judge of Israel, which circumstance happened much about the same
time. The story of the substitution of the hind for the damsel, when
about to be slain, was possibly founded on the substituted offering for
Isaac when about to be offered by his father; for it is not probable
that the people 420 xii. 146 . of Greece were entirely ignorant of the existence of the books of Moses,
and that wonderful narrative would be not unlikely to make an impression
on minds ever ready to be attracted by the marvellous. Some writers have
taken pains to show that Agamemnon did not sacrifice, or contemplate
sacrificing, his own daughter, by asserting that the Iphigenia here
mentioned was the daughter of Helen, who was educated by Clytemnestra,
the wife of Agamemnon, and the sister of Helen. Pausanias also adopts
this view, and gives for his authorities Euphorion of Chalcis,
Alexander, Stesichorus, and the people of Argos, who preserved a
tradition to the same effect. Lucretius, Virgil, and Diodorus Siculus are in the number of those who
assert that Iphigenia actually was immolated. According to Dictys the
Cretan, and several of the ancient scholiasts, Ulysses having left the
Grecian camp without the knowledge of Agamemnon, went to Argos, and
returned with Iphigenia, under the pretext that her father intended to
marry her to Achilles. Some writers state that Achilles was in love with
Iphigenia; and that he was greatly enraged at Ulysses for bringing her
to the camp, and opposed her sacrifice to the utmost of his power. Ovid then proceeds to recount the adventures of the Greeks, after their
arrival at Troy. An oracle had warned the Greeks, that he who should be
the first to land on the Trojan shores, would inevitably be slain.
Protesilaüs seeing that this prediction damped the courage of his
companions, led the way, and sacrificed his life for the safety of his
friends, being slain by Hector immediately on his landing. Cygnus,
signalizing himself by his bravery, attracted the attention of Achilles,
who singled him out as a worthy antagonist. It was said that this hero
was the son of Neptune; perhaps because he was powerful by sea, and the
prince of some island in the Archipelago. He was said to be
invulnerable, most probably because his shield was arrow-proof. The
story of his transformation into a swan, has evidently no other
foundation than the resemblance between his name and that of that
bird. FABLES III. AND IV. A truce ensuing, the Grecian chiefs
having assembled at a feast, express their surprise at the fact of
Cygnus being invulnerable. Nestor, by way of showing a still more
surprising instance, relates how the Nymph Cænis, the daughter of
Elatus, having yielded to the caresses of Neptune, was transformed by
him into a man, and made invulnerable. Cæneus being present at the
wedding feast of Pirithoüs, the son of Ixion, where Eurytus was a guest,
the latter, being elevated with wine, made an attempt upon Hippodamia,
the bride; on which a quarrel arose between the Centaurs and the
Lapithæ. After many on both sides had been slain, Cæneus still remained
unhurt; on which, the Centaurs having heaped up trunks of trees upon
him, he was pressed to death; Neptune then changed his body into a
bird. This toil 17 and this combat brought on a cessation for
many 421 xii. 146-174. days; and both sides rested, laying aside their arms. And while a
watchful guard was keeping the Phrygian walls, and a watchful guard was
keeping the Argive trenches, a festive day had arrived, on which
Achilles, the conqueror of Cygnus, appeased Pallas with the blood of a
heifer, adorned with fillets. As soon as he had placed its entrails 18 upon the glowing altars, and the smell, acceptable
to the Deities, mounted up to the skies, the sacred rites had their
share, the other part was served up at the table. The chiefs reclined on
couches, and sated their bodies with roasted flesh, 19 and banished
both their cares and their thirst with wine. No harps, no melody of
voices, 20 no long pipe of boxwood pierced with many a hole,
delights them; but in discourse they pass the night, and valour is the
subject-matter of their conversation. They relate the combats of the
enemy and their own; and often do they delight to recount, in turn, both
the dangers that they have encountered and that they have surmounted.
For of what else should Achilles speak? or of what, in
preference, should they speak before the great Achilles? But especially the recent victory over the conquered Cygnus was the subject
of discourse. It seemed wonderful to them all, that the body of the
youth was penetrable by no weapon, and was susceptible of no wounds, and
that it blunted the steel itself. This same thing, the grandson of
Æacus, this, the Greeks wondered at. When thus Nestor says to them : “Cygnus has been the only
despiser of weapons in your time, and penetrable by no blows. But I
myself formerly saw the Perrhæbean 21 Cæneus bear a thousand blows
with his body unhurt; Cæneus the Perrhæbean, I say , who,
famous for his achievements, inhabited Othrys. And that this, too, might
be the more wondrous in 422 xii. 174-205 . him, he was born a woman.” They are surprised, whoever are present, at
the singular nature of this prodigy, and they beg him to tell the story.
Among them, Achilles says, “Pray tell us, (for we all have the same
desire to hear it,) O eloquent old man, 22 the wisdom of our
age; who was this Cæneus, and why changed to the opposite
sex? in what war, and in the engagements of what contest was he known to
thee? by whom was he conquered, if he was conquered by any one?” Then the aged man replied : “Although tardy old age is a
disadvantage to me, and many things which I saw in my early years escape
me now , yet I remember most of them ; and there is nothing,
amid so many transactions of war and peace, that is more firmly fixed in
my mind than that circumstance. And if extended age could make any one a
witness of many deeds, I have lived two hundred 23 years, and now my third century is being passed by me . Cænis, the
daughter of Elatus, was remarkable for her charms; the most beauteous
virgin among the Thessalian maids, and one sighed for in vain by the
wishes of many wooers through the neighbouring cities , and
through thy cities, Achilles, for she was thy countrywoman. Perhaps,
too, Peleus would have attempted that alliance; but at that time the
marriage of thy mother had either befallen him, or had been promised
him. Cænis did not enter into any nuptial ties; and as she was walking
along the lonely shore, she suffered violence from the God of the ocean.
’Twas thus that report stated; and when Neptune had experienced the
pleasures of this new amour, he said, ‘Be thy wishes secure from all
repulse; choose whatever thou mayst desire.’ The same report has related
this too; Cænis replied, ‘This mishap makes my desire extreme, that I
may not be in a condition to suffer any such thing in future .
Grant that I be no longer a woman, and thou wilt have
granted me all.’ She spoke these last words with a hoarser tone, and the
voice might seem to be that of a man, as indeed it was. “For now the God of the deep ocean had consented to her 423 xii. 206-238 . wish; and had granted moreover that he should not be able to be pierced
by any wounds, or to fall by any steel. Exulting in his
privilege, the Atracian 24 departed; and now spent his
time in manly exercises, and roamed over the Peneïan plains. Pirithoüs , the son of the bold Ixion, had married Hippodame, 25 and had bidden the cloud-born monsters to sit down
at the tables ranged in order, in a cave shaded with trees. The Hæmonian
nobles were there; I, too, was there, and the festive palace resounded
with the confused rout. Lo! they sing the marriage song, and the halls
smoke with the fires; 26 the maiden, too, is there, remarkable for her
beauty, surrounded by a crowd of matrons and newly married women. We all pronounce Pirithoüs fortunate in her for a wife; an omen
which we had well nigh falsified. For thy breast, Eurytus, most savage
of the savage Centaurs, is inflamed as much with wine as with seeing the
maiden; and drunkenness, redoubled by lust, holds sway over thee .
On the sudden the tables being overset, disturb the feast, and the bride
is violently dragged away by her seized hair. Eurytus snatches up
Hippodame, and the others such as each one fancies, or is able to seize ; and there is all the appearance of a captured
city. The house rings with the cries of women. Quickly we all rise; and
first, Theseus says, ‘What madness, Eurytus, is impelling thee, who,
while I still live, dost provoke Pirithoüs, and, in thy
ignorance, in one dost injure two?’ And that the valiant hero may not
say these things in vain, he pushes them off as they are pressing on,
and takes her whom they have seized away from them as they grow
furious. “He says nothing in answer, nor, indeed, can he defend such actions
by words; but he attacks the face of her protector with insolent hands,
and strikes his generous breast. By chance, there is near at hand an
ancient bowl, rough with projecting figures, which, huge as it is, the
son of Ægeus, himself huger still , takes up and hurls full in his
face. He, vomiting 424 xii. 239-266. both from his wounds and his mouth clots of blood, 27 and brains and
wine together, lying on his back, kicks on the soaking sand. The double-limbed 28 Centaurs are inflamed at the death of their
brother; and all vying, with one voice exclaim, ‘To arms! to arms!’ Wine
gives them courage, and, in the first onset, cups hurled are flying
about, and shattered casks 29 and hollow cauldrons; things
before adapted for a banquet, now for war and slaughter. First, the son
of Ophion, Amycus, did not hesitate to spoil the interior of the house
of its ornaments; and first, from the shrine he tore up a chandelier, 30 thick set with blazing lamps; and lifting it on
high, like him who attempts to break the white neck of the bull with
sacrificial axe, he dashed it against the forehead of Celadon the
Lapithean, and left his skull mashed into his face, no longer to
be recognized. His eyes started out, and the bones of his face being
dashed to pieces, his nose was driven back, and was fixed in the middle
of his palate. Him, Belates the Pellæan, having torn away the foot of a
maple table, laid flat on the ground, with his chin sunk upon his
breast, and vomiting forth his teeth mixed with blood; and sent him, by
a twofold wound, to the shades of Tartarus. “As Gryneus stood next, looking at the smoking altar with a grim
look, he said, ‘ And why do we not make use of this?’ and then he raised an immense altar, together with its fire; and
hurled it into the midst of the throng of the Lapithæ, and struck down
two of them , Broteus and Orius. The mother of Orius was Mycale,
who was known by her incantations to have often drawn down the horns of
the struggling moon. On this Exadius says, ‘Thou shalt not go
unpunished, if only the opportunity of getting a weapon is given me;’
and, as his weapon, 425 xii. 266-299. he wields the antlers of a votive stag, 31 which were upon a
lofty pine-tree. With the double branches of these, Gryneus is pierced
through the eyes, and has those eyes scooped out. A part of them
adheres to the antlers, a part runs down his beard, and hangs down
clotted with gore. Lo! Rhœtus snatches up an immense flaming brand, from
the middle of the altar, and on the right side breaks through the
temples of Charaxus, covered with yellow hair. His locks, seized by the
violent flames, burn like dry corn, and the blood seared in the wound
emits a terrific noise in its hissing, such as the iron glowing in the
flames is often wont to emit, which, when the smith has drawn it out
with the crooked pincers, he plunges into the trough; whereon it
whizzes, and, sinking in the bubbling water, hisses. Wounded, he shakes
the devouring fire from his locks, and takes upon his shoulders the
threshold, torn up out of the ground, a whole waggon-load,
which its very weight hinders him from throwing full against the foe.
The stony mass, too, bears down Cometes, a friend, who is standing
at a short distance; nor does Rhœtus then restrain his joy, and he says, ‘In such manner do I pray that the rest of the
throng of thy party may be brave;’ and then he increases the
wound, redoubled with the half-burnt stake, and three or four times he
breaks the sutures of his head with heavy blows, and its bones sink
within the oozing brains. “Victorious, he passes on to Evagrus, and Corythus, and Dryas; of
which number , when Corythus, having his cheeks covered 32 with
their first down, has fallen, Evagrus says, ‘What glory has been
acquired by thee, in killing a boy?’ Rhœtus permits him to say no more,
and fiercely thrusts the glowing flames into the open mouth of the hero,
as he is speaking, and through the mouth into the breast. Thee, too,
cruel Dryas, he pursues, whirling the fire around his head, but the same
issue does not await thee as well. Thou piercest him with a stake burnt
at the end, while triumphing in the success of an 426 xii. 299-328. uninterrupted slaughter, in the spot where the neck is united to the
shoulder. Rhœtus groans aloud, and with difficulty wrenches the stake
out of the hard bone, and, drenched in his own blood, he flies. Orneus
flies, too, and Lycabas, and Medon, wounded in his right shoulder-blade,
and Thaumas with Pisenor; Mermerus, too, who lately excelled all in
speed of foot, but now goes more slowly from the wound he has
received; Pholus, too, and Melaneus, and Abas a hunter of boars, and
Astylos the augur, who has in vain dissuaded his own party from this
warfare. He also says to Nessus, 33 as he dreads the wounds, ‘Fly not! for thou shalt be reserved for the bow of Hercules.’ But
Eurynomus and Lycidas, and Areos, and Imbreus did not escape death, all
of whom the right hand of Dryas pierced right through. Thou, too,
Crenæus, didst receive a wound in front, 34 although thou
didst turn thy back in flight; for looking back, thou didst receive the
fatal steel between thy two eyes, where the nose is joined to the lower
part of the forehead. In the midst of so much noise, Aphidas was lying
fast asleep from the wine which he had drunk incessantly, and was not
aroused, and in his languid hand was grasping the mixed bowl, stretched
at full length upon the shaggy skin of a bear of Ossa. Soon as Phorbas
beheld him from afar, wielding no arms, he inserted his fingers in the
strap of his lance, 35 and said, ‘Drink thy wine mingled with the
water of Styx;’ and, delaying no longer, he hurled his javelin
against the youth, and the ash pointed with steel was driven into his
neck, as, by chance, he lay there on his back. His death happened
without his being sensible of it; and the blood flowed from his full
throat, both upon the couch and into the bowl itself. “I saw Petræus endeavouring to tear up an acorn-bearing oak from the
earth; and , as he was grasping it in his embrace, 427 xii. 328-364. and was shaking it on this side and that, and was moving about the
loosened tree, the lance of Pirithoüs hurled at the ribs of Petræus,
transfixed his struggling breast together with the tough oak. They said, too , that Lycus fell by the valour of Pirithoüs, and that
Chromis fell by the hand of Pirithoüs. But each of them gave less glory to the conqueror, than Dictys and Helops gave.
Helops was transfixed by the javelin, which passed right through his
temples, and, hurled from the right side, penetrated to his left ear.
Dictys, slipping from the steep point of a rock, while, in his fear, he
is flying from the pursuing son of Ixion, falls down headlong, and, by
the weight of his body, breaks a huge ash tree, and spits his own
entrails upon it, thus broken. Aphareus advances as his
avenger, and endeavours to hurl a stone torn away from the mountain. As
he is endeavouring to do so , the son of Ægeus attacks him with an
oaken club, and breaks the huge bones of his arm, and has neither
leisure, nor, indeed , does he care to put his useless body to
death; and he leaps upon the back of the tall Bianor, not used to bear 36 any other than himself; and he fixes his knees in
his ribs, and holding his long hair, seized with his left hand, shatters
his face, and his threatening features, and his very hard temples, with
the knotty oak. With his oak, too , he levels Nedymnus, and
Lycotas the darter, and Hippasus having his breast covered with his
flowing beard, and Ripheus, who towered above the topmost woods, and
Tereus, who used to carry home the bears, caught in the Hæmonian
mountains, alive and raging. “Demoleon could not any longer endure Theseus enjoying this success
in the combat, and he tried with vast efforts to tear up from the
thick-set wood an aged pine; because he could not effect this, he hurled
it, broken short, against his foe. But Theseus withdrew afar from the
approaching missile, through the warning of Pallas; so at least he himself wished it to be thought. Yet the tree did not fall without
effect: for it struck off from the throat of the tall Crantor, both his
breast and his left shoulder. He, Achilles, had been the armour-bearer
of thy father: him Amyntor, king of the Dolopians, 37 428 xii. 364-397. when conquered in war, had given to the son of Æacus, as a pledge and
confirmation of peace. When Peleus saw him at a distance, mangled with a
foul wound, he said, ‘Accept however, Crantor, most beloved of youths,
this sacrifice;’ and, with a strong arm, and energy of intention, he
hurled his ashen lance against Demoleon, which broke through the
enclosures of his ribs, and quivered, sticking amid the bones. He draws
out with his hand the shaft without the point; even that follows, with
much difficulty; the point is retained within his lungs. The very pain
gives vigour to his resolution; though wounded, he rears against
the enemy, and tramples upon the hero with his horse’s feet. The other
receives the re-echoing strokes upon his helmet and his shield, and
defends his shoulders, and holds his arms extended before him, and
through the shoulder-blades he pierces two breasts 38 at one stroke.
But first, from afar, he had consigned to death Phlegræus, and Hyles; in
closer combat, Hiphinoüs and Clanis. To these is added Dorylas, who had
his temples covered with a wolf’s skin, and the real horns of oxen
reddened with much blood, that performed the duty of a cruel weapon. “To him I said, for courage gave me strength, ‘Behold, how much thy
horns are inferior to my steel;’ and then I threw my javelin.
When he could not avoid this, he held up his right hand before his
forehead, about to receive the blow; and to his forehead his hand
was pinned. A shout arose; but Peleus struck him delaying, and
overpowered by the painful wound, (for he was standing next to him) with
his sword beneath the middle of his belly. He leaped forth, and fiercely
dragged his own bowels on the ground, and trod on them thus dragged, and burst them thus trodden; and he entangled his legs,
as well in them, and fell down, with his belly emptied of its inner
parts . Nor did thy beauty, Cyllarus, 39 save thee while
fighting, if only we allow beauty to that monstrous nature of
thine . His beard was beginning to grow ; the colour of his
beard was that of gold; and golden-coloured hair was hanging from his
shoulders to the middle of his shoulder-blades. In his face there was a
pleasing briskness; his neck, and his 429 xii. 397-435. shoulders, and his hands, and his breast were resembling the
applauded statues of the artists, and so in those parts in which
he was a man; nor was the shape of the horse beneath that shape ,
faulty and inferior to that of the man. Give him but the
neck and the head of a horse, and he would be worthy of Castor.
So fit is his back to be sat upon, so stands his breast erect with
muscle; he is all over blacker than black pitch; yet his tail is
white; the colour, too, of his legs is white. Many a female of his own
kind longed for him; but Hylonome alone gained him, than whom no female
more handsome lived in the lofty woods, among the half beasts. She alone
attaches Cyllarus, both by her blandishments, and by loving, and by
confessing that she loves him. Her care, too, of her person is as great
as can be in those limbs: so that her hair is smoothed with a comb; so
that she now decks herself with rosemary, now with violets or roses, and sometimes she wears white lilies; and twice a day she washes
her face with streams that fall from the height of the Pagasæan wood; and twice she dips her body in the stream: and she throws over
her shoulder or her left side no skins but what are becoming, and are
those of choice beasts. “Their love was equal: together they wandered upon the mountains;
together they entered the caves; and then, too, together had they
entered the Lapithæan house; together were they waging the fierce
warfare. The author of the deed is unknown: but a javelin
came from the left side, and pierced thee, Cyllarus, below the
spot where the breast is joined to the neck. The heart, being
pierced with a small wound, grew cold, together with the whole body,
after the weapon was drawn out. Immediately, Hylonome receives his dying
limbs, and cherishes the wound, by laying her hand on it, and places her
mouth on his, and strives to stop the fleeting life. When she sees him
dead, having uttered what the clamour hinders from reaching my ears, she
falls upon the weapon that has pierced him, and as she dies, embraces
her husband. He, too, now stands before my eyes, Phæocomes, namely , who had bound six lions’ skins together with connecting
knots; covered all over, both horse and man. He, having discharged the
trunk of a tree, which two yokes of oxen joined together could hardly
have moved, battered the son of Phonolenus on the top of his head. The
very broad round form of his skull was broken; and through his mouth,
and 430 xii. 435-464. through his hollow nostrils, and his eyes, and his ears, his softened
brains poured down; just as curdled milk is wont through the oaken
twigs, or as any liquor flows under the weight of a well-pierced
sieve, and is squeezed out thick through the numerous holes. But I,
while he was preparing to strip him of his arms as he lay, (this thy
sire knows,) plunged my sword into the lower part of his belly, as he
was spoiling him. Chthonius, too, and Teleboas, lay pierced by my
sword. The former was bearing a two-forked bough as his weapon ,
the latter a javelin; with his javelin he gave me a wound. You see the
marks; look! the old scar is still visible. “Then ought I 40 to have been sent to the taking of Troy; then I
might, if not have overcome, still have stayed the arms of the
mighty Hector. But at that time Hector was not existing, or but a
boy; and now my age is failing. Why tell thee of Periphas, the
conqueror of the two-formed Pyretus? Why of Ampyx, who fixed his
cornel-wood spear, without a point, full in the face of the four-footed
Oëclus? Macareus, struck down the Pelethronian 41 Erigdupus, 42 by
driving a crowbar into his breast. I remember, too, that a hunting
spear, hurled by the hand of Nessus, was buried in the groin of Cymelus.
And do not believe that Mopsus, 43 the son of Ampycus, only foretold
things to come; a two-formed monster was slain by Mopsus,
darting at him , and Odites in vain attempted to speak, his tongue
being nailed to his chin, and his chin to his throat. Cæneus had put
five to death, Stiphelus, and Bromus, and Antimachus, and Helimus, and
Pyracmos, wielding the axe. I do not remember their
respective wounds, but I marked their numbers, and their
names. Latreus, most huge both in his limbs and his body, sallied forth,
armed with the spoils of Emathian 44 Halesus, whom he had consigned to
death. His age was between that of a youth, and an old man; 431 xii. 465-494. his vigour that of a youth; grey hairs variegated his temples.
Conspicuous by his buckler, and his helmet, and his Macedonian pike; 45 and turning his face towards both sides, he
brandished his arms, and rode in one same round, and vaunting, poured
forth thus many words into the yielding air:— “‘And shall I put up with thee, too, Cænis? for to me thou shalt ever
be a woman, to me always Cænis. Does not thy natal origin lower thy spirit ? And does it not occur to thy mind for what foul deed thou didst get thy reward, and at what price the false resemblance
to a man? Consider both what thou wast born, as well as what thou hast
submitted to: go, and take up a distaff together with thy baskets, and
twist the threads 46 with thy thumb; leave warfare to men.’ As he is
vaunting in such terms, Cæneus pierces his side, stretched in running,
with a lance hurled at him, just where the man is joined to the horse.
He raves with pain, and strikes at the exposed face of the Phylleian 47 youth with his pike. It bounds back no otherwise
than hail from the roof of a house; or than if any one were to beat a
hollow drum with a little pebble. Hand to hand he encounters him, and
strives to plunge his sword into his tough side; but the parts
are impervious to his sword. ‘Yet,’ says he, ‘thou shalt not escape me;
with the middle of the sword shalt thou be slain, since the point is
blunt;’ and then he slants the sword against his side, and grasps
his stomach with his long right arm. The blow produces an echo, as on a
body of marble when struck; and the shivered blade flies different ways,
upon striking his neck. “After Cæneus had enough exposed his unhurt limbs to him in his
amazement, ‘Come now,’ said he, ‘let us try thy body with my steel;’ and
up to the hilt he plunged his fatal sword into his shoulder-blade, and
extended his hand unseen into his entrails, and worked it about, and in
the wound made a fresh wound. Lo! the double-limbed monsters, enraged, rush on 432 xii. 494-533. in an impetuous manner, and all of them hurl and thrust their weapons at
him alone. Their weapons fall blunted. Unstabbed and bloodless the
Elateïan Cæneus remains from each blow. This strange thing makes them
astonished. ‘Oh great disgrace!’ cries Monychus; ‘a whole people,
we are overcome by one, and that hardly a man; although, indeed ,
he is a man; and we by our dastardly actions, are what he once was. What signify our huge limbs? What our twofold strength? What that
our twofold nature has united in us the stoutest animals in existence?
I neither believe that we are born of a Goddess for our mother, nor
of Ixion, who was so great a person, that he conceived hopes of even the supreme Juno. By a half male foe are we baffled. Heap
upon him stones and beams, and entire mountains, and dash out his
long-lived breath, by throwing whole woods upon him . Let a whole wood press on his jaws; and weight shall be in the place of
wounds.’ “ Thus he said; and by chance having got a tree, thrown down by
the power of the boisterous South wind, he threw it against the powerful
foe: and he was an example to the rest ; and in a short time,
Othrys, thou wast bare of trees, and Pelion had no shades. Overwhelmed
by this huge heap, Cæneus swelters beneath the weight of the trees, and
bears on his brawny shoulders the piled-up oaks. But after the load has
increased upon his face and his head, and his breath has no air to draw;
at one moment he faints, at another he endeavours, in vain, to raise
himself into the open air, and to throw off the wood cast upon
him : and sometimes he moves it. Just as lo! we see, if lofty Ida is
convulsed with earthquakes. The event is doubtful. Some gave out that
his body was hurled to roomy Tartarus by the weight of the wood. The son
of Ampycus denied this, and saw go forth into the liquid air, from amid
the pile, a bird with tawny wings; which then was beheld by me for
the first time, then, too , for the last. When Mopsus saw it with
gentle flight surveying his camp, and making a noise around it with a
vast clamour, following him both with his eyes and his feelings, he
said, ‘Hail! thou glory of the Lapithæan race, once the greatest of men,
but now the only bird of thy kind , Cæneus.’ This thing was
credited from its assertor. Grief added resentment, and we bore it with
disgust, that one was overpowered by foes so 433 xii. 533-535. many. Nor did we cease to exercise our weapons, in shedding their blood, before a part of them was put to death, and flight and the night
dispersed the rest.” EXPLANATION. We learn from Diodorus Siculus, and other ancient authors, that the
people of Thessaly, and those especially who lived near Mount Pelion,
were the first who trained horses for riding, and used them as a
substitute for chariots. Pliny the Elder says that they excelled all the
other people of Greece in horsemanship, and that they carried it to such
perfection, that the name of ἱππεὺς , ‘a horseman,’ and that of ‘Thessalian,’ became
synonymous. Again, the Thessalians, from their dexterity in killing the
wild bulls that infested the neighbouring mountains, sometimes with
darts or spears, and at other times in close engagement, acquired the
name of Hippocentaurs, that is, ‘horsemen that hunted bulls,’ or simply κένταυροι ,
‘Centaurs.’ It is not improbable that, because the Thessalians began to practise
riding in the reign of Ixion, the poets made the Centaurs his sons; and
they were said to have a cloud for their mother, which Jupiter put in
the place of Juno, to baulk the attempt of Ixion on her virtue, because,
according to Palæphatus, many of them lived in a city called Nephele,
which, in Greek, signifies a cloud. As another method of accounting for
their alleged descent from a cloud, it has been suggested that the
Centaurs were a rapacious race of men, who ravaged the neighbouring
country: that those who wrote the first accounts of them, in the ancient
dialect of Greece, gave them the name of Nephelim, (the epithet of the
giants of Scripture,) many Phœnician words having been imported in the
early language of that country; and that in later times, finding them
called by this name, the Greek word Nephelè, signifying ‘a cloud,’
persons readily adopted the fable that they were born of one. The Centaurs being the descendants of Centaurus, the son of Ixion, and
Pirithoüs being also the son of Ixion, by Dia, the former, declared war
against Pirithoüs, asserting, that, as the descendants of Ixion, they
had a right to share in the succession to his dominions. This quarrel,
however, was made up, and they continued on friendly terms, until the
attempt of Eurytus, or Eurytion, on Hippodamia, the bride of Pirithoüs,
which was followed by the consequences here described by Ovid. The
Centaurs are twice mentioned in the Iliad as φῆρες , or ‘wild beasts,’ and once under the name of
‘Centaurs.’ Pindar is the first writer that mentions them as being of a
twofold form, partly man, and partly horse. In the twenty-first Book of
the Odyssey, line 295, Eurytion is said to have had his ears and nose
cut off by way of punishment, and that, from that period, ‘discord arose
between the Centaurs and men.’ Buttman, (Mythologus, ii. p. 22, as quoted by Mr. Keightley), says that
the names of Centaurs and Lapithæ are two purely poetic names, used to
designate two opposite races of men,—the former, the rude
horse-riding tribes, which tradition records to have been spread over
the north of Greece: the latter, the more civilized race, which founded
towns, and gradually drove their wild neighbours back into the
mountains. He thinks 434 xii. 536-541. that the explanation of the word ‘Centaurs,’ as ‘Air-piercers,’ (from κεντεῖν τὴν
αὔραν ) not an improbable one, for the idea is suggested by the
figure of a Cossack leaning forward with his protruded lance as he
gallops along. But he regards the idea of κένταυρος , having been in its origin simply κέντωρ , as much more probable,
[it meaning simply ‘the spurrer-on.’] Lapithæ may, he thinks, have
signified ‘Stone persuaders,’ from λᾶας πείθειν , a poetic appellation for the
builders of towns. He supposes Hippodamia to have been a Centauress,
married to the prince of the Lapithæ, and thus accounts for the Centaurs
having been at the wedding. Mr. Keightley, in his ‘Mythology of Ancient
Greece and Italy,’ remarks that ‘it is certainly not a little strange
that a rude mountain race like the Centaurs should be viewed as
horsemen; and the legend which ascribes the perfecting of the art of
horsemanship to the Lapithæ, is unquestionably the more probable one.
The name Centaur, which so much resembles the Greek verb κεντέω , ‘to spur,’ we fancy gave origin
to the fiction. This derivation of it is, however, rather dubious.’ After the battle here described, the Centaurs retreated to the mountains
of Arcadia. The Lapithæ pursuing them, drove them to the Promontory of
Malea in Laconia, where, according to Apollodorus, Neptune took them
into his protection. Servius and Antimachus, as quoted by Comes Natalis,
say that some of them fled to the Isle of the Sirens (or rather to that
side of Italy which those Nymphs had made their abode); and that there
they were destroyed by the voluptuous and debauched lives they led. The fable of Cæneus, which Ovid has introduced, is perhaps simply
founded on the prodigious strength and the goodness of the armour of a
person of that name. The story of Halyonome killing herself on the body
of Cyllarus, may possibly have been handed down by tradition. It is not
unlikely that, if the Centaurs were horsemen, their women were not
unacquainted with horsemanship; indeed, representations of female
Centaurs are given, on ancient monuments, as drawing the chariot of
Bacchus. FABLES V. AND VI. Periclymenus , the brother of Nestor,
who has received from Neptune the power of transforming himself, is
changed into an eagle, in a combat with Hercules; and in his flight is
shot by him with an arrow. Neptune prays Apollo to avenge the death of
Cygnus: because the Destinies will not permit him to do so himself.
Apollo enters the Trojan camp in disguise, and directs the arrow which
Paris aims at Achilles; who is mortally wounded in the heel, the only
vulnerable part of his body. As the Pylian related this fight between the Lapithæ and the
Centaurs, but half human, Tlepolemus 48 could not endure
his sorrow for Alcides being passed by with silent lips, and said, “It
is strange, old man, that thou shouldst have a forgetfulness of the exploits
of Hercules; at least, my father himself used often 435 xii. 541-576. to relate to me, that these cloud-begotten monsters were
conquered by him.” The Pylian, sad at this, said, “Why dost thou force
me to call to mind my misfortunes, and to rip up my sorrows, concealed
beneath years, and to confess my hatred of, and disgust at, thy father?
He, indeed, ye Gods! performed things beyond all belief, and filled the
world with his services; which I could rather wish could be denied; but
we are in the habit of praising neither Deiphobus nor Polydamas, 49 nor
Hector himself: for who would commend an enemy? That father of thine
once overthrew the walls of Messene, and demolished guiltless cities,
Elis and Pylos, and carried the sword and flames into my abode. And,
that I may say nothing of others whom he slew, we were twice six sons of
Neleus, goodly youths; the twice six fell by the might of Hercules,
myself alone excepted. And that the others were vanquished might have
been endured; but the death of Periclymenus is wonderful; to whom
Neptune, the founder of the Neleian family, had granted to be able to
assume whatever shapes he might choose, and again, when assumed, to lay
them aside. He, after he had in vain been turned into all other shapes,
was turned into the form of the bird that is wont to carry the
lightnings in his crooked talons, the most acceptable to the king of the
Gods. Using the strength of that bird, his wings, and his crooked
bill, together with his hooked talons, he tore the face of the hero. The
Tirynthian hero aims at him his bow, too unerring, and hits him, as he
moves his limbs aloft amid the clouds, and hovering in the air ,
just where the wing is joined to the side. “Nor is the wound a great one, but his sinews, cut by the wound, fail
him, and deny him motion and strength for flying. He fell down to the
earth, his weakened pinions not catching the air; and where the smooth
arrow had stuck in his wing, it was pressed still further by the
weight of his pierced body, and it was driven, through the upper side,
into the left part of the neck. Do I seem to be owing encomiums to the
exploits of thy father Hercules, most graceful leader of the
Rhodian fleet? 50 Yet I will no further avenge my brothers, 436 xii. 576-602. than by being silent on his brave deeds: with thyself I have a firm
friendship.” After the son 51 of Neleus had said these things
with his honied tongue, the gifts of Bacchus being resumed after the
discourse of the aged man, they arose from their couches: the rest of
the night was given to sleep. But the God who commands the waters of the sea with his trident,
laments, with the affection of a father, the body of his son, changed
into the bird of the son of Sthenelus; and abhorring the ruthless
Achilles, pursues his resentful wrath in more than an ordinary manner.
And now, the war having been protracted for almost twice five years,
with such words as these he addresses the unshorn Smintheus: 52 “O thou, most acceptable to me, by far, of the sons of my brother,
who, together with me, didst build the walls of Troy in vain; and dost
thou not grieve when thou lookest upon these towers so soon to fall? or
dost thou not lament that so many thousands are slain in defending these
walls? and (not to recount them all) does not the ghost of Hector,
dragged around his Pergamus, recur to thee? Though still the fierce
Achilles, more blood-stained than war itself, lives on, the destroyer of
our toil, let him but put himself in my power, I will make him feel
what I can do with my triple spear. But since it is not allowed us to
encounter the enemy in close fight, destroy him, when off his guard,
with a secret shaft.” He nodded his assent; and the Delian God , indulging together
both his own resentment and that of his uncle, veiled in a cloud, comes
to the Trojan army, and in the midst of the slaughter of the men, he
sees Paris, at intervals, scattering his darts among the ignoble Greeks;
and, discovering himself to be a Divinity, he says, “Why dost thou waste
thy arrows upon 437 xii. 602-628. the blood of the vulgar? If thou hast any concern for thy friends, turn
upon the grandson of Æacus, and avenge thy slaughtered brothers.” Thus he said; and pointing at the son of Peleus, mowing down the
bodies of the Trojans with the sword, he turned his bow towards him, and
directed his unerring arrow with a fatal right hand. This was the
only thing at which, after the death of Hector, the aged
Priam could rejoice. And art thou then, Achilles, the conqueror of men
so great, conquered by the cowardly ravisher of a Grecian wife? But if
it had been fated for thee to fall by the hand of a woman, thou wouldst
rather have fallen by the Thermodontean 53 battle-axe. Now that dread of the Phrygians, the glory and defence of the
Pelasgian name, the grandson of Æacus, a head invincible in war,
had been burnt: the same Divinity had armed him, 54 and had burned
him. He is now but ashes; and there remains of Achilles, so
renowned, I know not what; that which will not well fill a little
urn. But his glory lives, which can fill the whole world: this allowance
is befitting that hero, and in this the son of Peleus is equal to
himself, and knows not the empty Tartarus. Even his very shield gives
occasion for war, that you may know to whom it belongs; and arms are
wielded for arms. The son of Tydeus does not dare to claim them, nor
Ajax, the son of Oïleus, 55 nor the younger son of Atreus, nor
he who is his superior both in war and age, nor any others; the
hope of so much glory exists only in him begotten by Telamon and the
son of Laërtes. The descendant of Tantalus 56 removes from
himself the burden and the odium of a decision , and orders the
Argive leaders to sit in the midst of the camp, and transfers the
judgment of the dispute to them all . EXPLANATION. Periclymenus was the son of Neleus and Chloris, as we are told by 438 Homer, Apollodorus, and other authors. According to these authors,
Neleus, king of Orchomenus, was the son of Neptune, who assumed the form
of the river Enipeus, the more easily to deceive Tyro, the daughter of
Salmoneus. Neleus married Chloris, the daughter of Amphion, king of
Thebes, who bore him eleven sons and one daughter, of which number,
Homer names but three. Periclymenus, the youngest of the family, was a
warlike prince, and, according to Apollodorus, accompanied Jason in the
expedition of the Argonauts. Hercules, after having instituted the
Olympic games, marched into Messenia, and declared war with Neleus. The
ancient writers differ as to the cause of this expedition; but they
agree in stating, that Hercules made himself master of Pylos,
a town which Neleus had built, as a refuge from the capricious
humours of his brother Pelias; and that Neleus and all his children were
killed, except Nestor, who had been brought up among the Geranians, and
who afterwards reigned in Pylos. The story which here relates how
Periclymenus transformed himself into an eagle, and was then killed by
Hercules, may possibly mean, that having long resisted the attacks of
his formidable enemy, he was at length put to flight, and slain by an
arrow. It is said that Neptune had given him the power to metamorphose
himself into different figures, very probably because his grandfather,
who was a maritime prince, had taught him the art of war and various
stratagems, which he industriously made use of, to avert the ruin of his
family. In relation to the story of the death of Achilles, Dictys the Cretan
tells us, that Achilles having seen Polyxena, the daughter of Priam,
along with Cassandra, as she was sacrificing to Apollo, fell in love
with her, and demanded her in marriage and that Hector would not consent
to it, except on condition of his betraying the Greeks. This demand, so
injurious to his honour, provoked Achilles so much, that he forthwith
slew Hector, and dragged his body round the walls of the city. He
further says that when Priam went to demand the body of Hector, he took
Polyxena with him, in order to soften Achilles. His design succeeded,
and Priam then agreed to give her to him in marriage. On the day
appointed for the solemnity in the temple of Apollo, Paris, concealing
himself behind the altar, while Deiphobus pretended to embrace Achilles,
wounded him in the heel, and killed him on the spot, either because the
arrow was poisoned, or because he was wounded on the great tendon, which
has since been called ‘tendon Achillis,’ a spot where a wound might
very easily be mortal. This story of the death of Achilles does not seem to have been known to
Homer; for he appears, in the twenty-fourth book of the Odyssey, to
insinuate that that hero died in battle, fighting for the Grecian
cause. After his death Achilles was honoured as a Demigod, and Strabo says that
he had a temple near the promontory of Sigæum. Pausanias and Pliny the
Elder make mention of an island in the Euxine Sea, where the memory of
Achilles was expressly honoured, from which circumstances it had the
name of Achillea. 1. Unavailing offerings. ]—Ver. 3. ‘Inferias inanes’ is a
poetical expression, signifying the offering sacrifices of honey, milk,
wine, blood, flowers, frankincense, and other things, at a tomb, which
was empty or honorary. The Greeks called these kind of sacrifices by the
name of χοαὶ . 2. A ravished wife. ]—Ver. 5. This was Helen, the wife of
Menelaüs, whose abduction by Paris was the cause of the Trojan war. 3. A thousand ships. ]—Ver. 7. That is, a thousand in
round numbers. For Homer makes them, 1186; Dictys Cretensis, 1225; and
Dares, 1140. 4. The whole body. ]—Ver. 7. The adjective ‘commune’ is here
used substantively, and signifies ‘the whole body.’ 5. Serpent seized. ]—Ver. 16-17. Clarke translates this line,
‘Which the snake whipt up, as also the dam flying about her loss, and
buried them in his greedy paunch.’ 6. On the top. ]—Ver. 43. ‘Summaque domum sibi legit in arce,’
is translated by Clarke, ‘And chooses there a house for herself, on the
very tip-top of it.’ 7. Protesilaüs. ]—Ver. 68. He was the husband of Laodamia, the
daughter of Acastus. His father was Iphiclus, who was noted for his
extreme swiftness. 8. Spear of Hector. ]—Ver. 67. Some writers say that he fell by
the hand of Æneas. 9. Of a Nereid. ]—Ver. 93. Cygnus says this sarcastically, in
allusion to Achilles being born of Thetis, a daughter of
Nereus. 10. As a bull. ]—Ver. 103-4. Clarke translates these lines in
this comical strain: ‘Achilles was as mad as a bull in the open Circus,
when he pushes at the red coat, stuffed, used on purpose to provoke
him.’ 11. The open Circus. ]—Ver. 104. We learn from Seneca, that it
was the custom in the ‘venationes’ of the Circus to irritate the bull
against his antagonist, by thrusting in his path figures stuffed with
straw or hay, and covered with red cloth. Similar means are used to
provoke the bull in the Spanish bull-fights of the present day. 12. Eëtionian. ]—Ver. 110. Eëtion, the father of Andromache, the
wife of Hector, was the king of Thebes in Cilicia, which place was
ravaged by the Greeks for having sent assistance to the Trojans. 13. Caÿcus. ]—Ver. 111. The Caÿcus was a river of Mysia, in Asia
Minor, which country had incurred the resentment of the Greeks, for
having assisted the Trojans. 14. Telephus. ]—Ver. 112. Telephus, the son of Hercules and the
Nymph Auge, was wounded in combat by Achilles. By the direction of the
oracle, he applied to Achilles for his cure, which was effected by means
of the rust of the weapon with which the wound was made. 15. Lycian multitude. ]—Ver. 116. The Lycians, whose territory
was in Asia Minor, between Caria and Pamphylia, were allies of the
Trojans. 16. And dashes him. ]—Ver. 139. Clarke renders this line, ‘He overset him, and
thwacked him against the ground.’ 17. This toil. ]—Ver. 146. Clarke translates ‘Hic labor,’ ‘This
laborious bout.’ 18. Its entrails. ]—Ver. 152. The ‘prosecta,’ or ‘prosiciæ,’ or
‘ablegamina,’ were portions of the animal which were the first cut off,
for the purpose of becoming as a sacrifice to the Deities. The
‘prosecta,’ in general, consisted of a portion of the entrails. 19. Roasted flesh. ]—Ver. 155. We are informed by Servius, that
boiled meat was not eaten in the heroic ages. 20. Melody of voices. ]—Ver. 157. Plutarch remarks, that that
entertainment is the most pleasant where no musician is introduced;
conversation, in his opinion, being preferable. 21. Perrhæbean. ]—Ver. 172. The Perrhæbeans were a people of
Thessaly , who,
having been conquered by the Lapithæ, betook themselves to the mountain
fortresses of Pindus. 22. Eloquent old man. ]—Ver. 176-181. Clarke renders these
lines, ‘Come, tell us, O eloquent old gentleman, the wisdom of our
age, who was that Cæneus, and why he was turned into the other sex? in
which war, or what engagement, he was known to you? by whom he was
conquered, if he was conquered by any one?’ Upon that, the old blade
replied .’ 23. Two hundred. ]—Ver. 188. Ovid does not here follow the more
probable version, that the age of Nestor was three generations of thirty
years each. 24. The Atracian. ]—Ver. 209. ‘Atracides’ is an epithet, meaning
‘Thessalian,’ as Atrax, or Atracia, was a town of Thessaly, situated
near the banks of the river Peneus. 25. Hippodame. ]—Ver. 210. She is called Ischomache by
Propertius, and Deidamia by Plutarch. 26. With the fires. ]—Ver. 215. These fires would be those of
the nuptial torches, and of the altars for sacrifice to Hymenæus and the
other tutelary divinities of marriage. 27. Clots of blood. ]—Ver. 238. Clarke renders ‘Sanguinis
globos,’ ‘ goblets of blood.’ 28. Double-limbed. ]—Ver. 240. Clarke translates, ‘Ardescunt
bimembres,’ ‘The double-limbed fellows are in a flame.’ 29. Shattered cask. ]—Ver. 243. ‘Cadi’ were not only earthenware
vessels, in which wine was kept, but also the vessels used for drawing
water. 30. A chandelier. ]—Ver. 247. ‘Funale’ ordinarily means, ‘a
link,’ or ‘torch,’ made of fibrous substances twisted together, and
smeared with pitch or wax. In this instance the word seems to mean a
chandelier with several branches. 31. A votive stag. ]—Ver. 267. It appears that the horns of a
stag were frequently offered as a votive gift to the Deities, especially
to Diana, the patroness of the chase. Thus in the seventh Eclogue of
Virgil, Mycon vows to present to Diana, ‘Vivacis cornua cervi,’ ‘The
horns of a long-lived stag.’ 32. Cheeks covered. ]—Ver. 291. ‘Prima tectus lanugine malas,’
is not very elegantly rendered by Clarke, ‘Having his chaps covered with
down, then first putting out.’ 33. Nessus. ]—Ver. 309. We have already seen how Nessus the
Centaur met his death from the arrow of Hercules, when about to offer
violence to Deïanira. 34. A wound in front. ]—Ver. 312. It has been suggested that,
perhaps Ovid here had in his mind the story of one Pomponius, of whom
Quintilian relates, that, having received a wound in his face, he was
showing it to Cæsar, on which he was advised by the latter never to look
behind him when he was running away. 35. Strap of his lance. ]—Ver. 321. The ‘amentum’ was the thong,
or strap of leather, with which the lance, or javelin, was fastened, in
order to draw it back when thrown. 36. Not used to bear. ]—Ver. 346. He alludes to the twofold
nature, or ‘horse-part’ of the Centaur, as Clarke calls it. 37. The Dolopians. ]—Ver. 364. They were a people of Phthiotis
and Thessaly. 38. Pierces two breasts. ]—Ver. 377. He says this by poetical
license, in allusion to the two-fold form of the Centaurs. 39. Cyllarus. ]—Ver. 393. This was also the name of the horse
which Castor tamed, to which Ovid alludes in the 401st line. 40. Then ought I. ]—Ver. 445. Nestor here shows a little of the
propensity for boasting, which distinguishes him in the Iliad. 41. Pelethronian. ]—Ver. 452. Pelethronia was a region of
Thessaly, which contained a town and a mountain of that name. 42. Erigdupus. ]—Ver. 453. The signification of this name is
‘The noise of strife.’ 43. Mopsus. ]—Ver. 456. He was a prophet, and one of the
Lapithæ. There are two other persons mentioned in ancient history of the
same name. 44. Emathian. ]—Ver. 462. Properly, Emathia was a name of
Macedonia; but it is here applied to Thessaly, which adjoined to that
country. 45. Macedonian pike. ]—Ver. 466. The ‘sarissa’ is supposed to
have been a kind of pike with which the soldiers of the Macedonia
phalanx were armed. Its ordinary length was twenty-one feet; but those
used by the phalanx were twenty-four feet long. 46. Twist the threads. ]—Ver. 475. The woof was called
‘subtegmen,’ ‘subtemen,’ or ‘trama,’ while the warp was called ‘stamen,’
from ‘stare,’ ‘to stand,’ on account of its erect position in the
loom. 47. Phylleian. ]—Ver. 479. Phyllus was a city of Phthiotis, in
Thessaly. 48. Tlepolemus. ]—Ver. 537. He was a son of Hercules, by
Astioche. 49. Polydamas. ]—Ver. 547. He was a noble Trojan, of great
bravery, who had married a daughter of Priam. 50. Rhodian fleet. ]—Ver. 575. Tlepolemus, when a youth, slew
his uncle, Lycimnius, the son of Mars. Flying from his country with some
followers, he retired to the Island of Rhodes, where he gained the
sovereignty. He went to the Trojan war with nine ships, to aid the
Greeks, where he fell by the hand of Sarpedon. 51. After the son. ]—Ver. 578-9. ‘A sermone senis repetito
munere Bacchi Surrexere toris.’ These words are thus quaintly rendered
in Clarke’s translation: ‘From listening to the old gentleman’s
discourse, they return again to their bottle; and taking the other
glass, they departed.’ 52. Smintheus. ]—Ver. 585. Apollo was so called, in many of the
cities of Asia, and was worshipped under this name, in the Isle of
Tenedos. He is said by Eustathius, to have been so called from Smynthus,
a town near Troy. But, according to other accounts, he received the
epithet from the Cretan word σμίνθος , a mouse; being supposed to protect man
against the depredations of that kind of vermin. 53. Thermodontean. ]—Ver. 611. He alludes to Penthesilea, the
Queen of the Amazons, who, aiding the Trojans against the Greeks, was
slain by Achilles. The battle-axe was the usual weapon of the
Amazons 54. Had armed him. ]—Ver. 614. Vulcan, the God of Fire, made his
armour at the request of his mother, Thetis; and now his body was burned
by fire. 55. Son of Oïleus. ]—Ver. 622. This was Ajax, the King of the
Locrians. 56. Descendant of Tantalus. ]—Ver. 626. Agamemnon was the son of
Atreus, grandson of Pelops, and great-grandson of Tantalus. He wisely
refused to take upon himself alone the onus of deciding the contention
between Ajax and Ulysses. 439 BOOK THE THIRTEENTH. FABLE
I. After the death of Achilles, Ajax and
Ulysses contend for his armour; the Greek chiefs having adjudged it to
the last, Ajax kills himself in despair, and his blood is changed into a
flower. When Ulysses has brought Philoctetes, who is possessed of the
arrows of Hercules, to the siege, and the destinies of Troy are thereby
accomplished, the city is taken and sacked, and Hecuba becomes the slave
of Ulysses. The chiefs were seated; and a ring of the common people standing around , Ajax, the lord of the seven-fold shield, arose before
them. And as he was impatient in his wrath, with stern features he
looked back upon the Sigæan shores, and the fleet upon the shore, and,
stretching out his hands, he said, “We are pleading, 1 O Jupiter,
our cause before the ships, and Ulysses vies with me! But he did not
hesitate to yield to the flames of Hector, which I withstood, and which I drove from this fleet. It is safer, therefore, for him to
contend with artful words than with his right hand. But neither
does my talent lie in speaking, nor his 2 in acting; and as great ability
as I have in fierce warfare, so much has he in talking. Nor do I think,
O Pelasgians, that my deeds need be related to you; for you have
been eye-witnesses of them. Let Ulysses recount his, which he has
performed without any witness, and of which night alone 3 is
conscious. I own that the prize that is sought is great; but the
rival of Ajax lessens its value. It is no proud thing, great though it
may be, to possess any thing 440 xiii. 18-38. which Ulysses has hoped for. Already has he obtained the reward of this
contest, in which, when he shall have been worsted, he will be said to
have contended with me. And I, if my prowess were to be questioned,
should prevail by the nobleness of my birth, being the son of Telamon,
who took the city 4 of Troy under the valiant Hercules, and entered the
Colchian shores in the Pagasæan ship. Æacus was his father, who there
gives laws to the silent shades , where the heavy stone urges downward Sisyphus, 5 the son of Æolus. “The supreme Jupiter owns Æacus, and confesses that he is his
offspring. Thus Ajax is the third 6 from Jupiter. And yet, O Greeks,
let not this line of descent avail me in this cause, if it be not common
to me with the great Achilles. He was my cousin; 7 I ask for what
belonged to my cousin? Why does one descended from the blood of
Sisyphus, and very like him in thefts and fraud, intrude the name of a
strange family among the descendants of Æacus? Are the arms to be denied
me, because I took up arms before him , and through the means of
no informer? 8 and shall one seem preferable who was the last to take
them up, and who, by feigning madness, declined war, until the son of
Nauplius, 9 more cunning than he, but more unhappy for himself,
discovered the contrivance 10 of his 441 xiii. 38-61. cowardly mind, and dragged him forth to the arms which he had avoided.
Now let him take the best arms who would have taken none. Let me be
dishonoured, and stripped of the gifts that belonged to my cousin, who
presented myself in the front of danger. And I could wish that that
madness had been either real or believed so to be , and that he
had never attended us as a companion to the Phrygian towers, this
counsellor of evil! Then, son of Pœas, 11 Lemnos would not have had
thee exposed there through our guilt; who now, as they say,
concealed in sylvan caves, art moving the very rocks with thy
groans, and art wishing for the son of Laërtes what he has deserved;
which, may the Gods, the Gods, I say , grant thee not to pray
in vain. “And now, he that was sworn upon the same arms with ourselves, one of
our leaders, alas! by whom, as his successor, the arrows of Hercules are
used, broken by disease and famine, is being clothed 12 and fed by
birds; and in shooting fowls, he is employing the shafts destined for
the destruction of Troy. Still, he lives, because he did not accompany
Ulysses. And the unhappy Palamedes would have preferred that he had been
left behind; then he would have been living, or, at least, he
would have had a death without any criminality. Him, Ulysses remembering too well the unlucky discovery of his madness, pretended to
be betraying the Grecian interests, and proved his feigned charge, and
shewed the Greeks the gold, which he had previously hidden in the
ground. By exile then, or by death, 13 has he withdrawn from the Greeks
their 442 xiii. 61-89. best strength. Thus Ulysses fights, thus is he to be dreaded.
Though he were to excel even the faithful Nestor in eloquence, yet he
would never cause me to believe that the forsaking of Nestor 14 was
not a crime; who, when he implored the aid of Ulysses, retarded
by the wound of his steed, and wearied with the years of old age, was
deserted by his companion. The son of Tydeus knows full well that these
charges are not invented by me, who calling on him often by name,
rebuked him, and upbraided 15 his trembling friend with his
flight. The Gods above behold the affairs of men with just eyes. Lo! he
wants help, himself, who gave it not; and as he left another , so
was he doomed to be left: such law had he made for himself. “He called aloud to his companions. I came, and I saw him trembling,
and pale with fear, and shuddering at the impending death.
I opposed the mass of my shield to the enemy , and covered
him 16 as he lay; and I preserved (and that is the least
part of my praise) his dastardly life. If thou dost persist in vying,
let us return to that place; restore the enemy, and thy wound, and thy
wonted fear; and hide behind my shield, and under that contend with me.
But, after I delivered him, he to whom his wounds before gave no
strength for standing, fled, retarded by no wound whatever .
Hector approaches, and brings the Gods along with him to battle, and
where he rushes on, not only art thou alarmed, Ulysses, but even the
valiant are ; so great terror does he bring. Him, as he exulted in
the successes of his bloodstained slaughter, in close conflict,
I laid flat with a huge stone. Him demanding one with whom he might
engage, did I alone withstand; and you, Greeks, prayed it might
fall to my lot; 17 and your prayers prevailed. 443 xiii. 89-116. If you inquire into the issue of this fight, I was not beaten by
him. “Lo! the Trojans bring fire and sword, and Jove, as well ,
against the Grecian fleet. Where is now the eloquent Ulysses? I,
forsooth, protected a thousand ships, the hopes of your return, with my
breast. Grant me the arms, in return for so many ships. But, if I may be
allowed to speak the truth, a greater honour is sought for them
than is for me, and our glory is united; and Ajax is sought for the
arms, and not the arms by Ajax. Let the Ithacan Ulysses compare
with these things Rhesus, 18 and the unwarlike Dolon, 19 and
Helenus, 20 the son of Priam, made captive with the ravished
Pallas. By daylight nothing was done; nothing when Diomedes was afar. If
once you give these arms for services so mean, divide them, and that of
Diomedes would be the greater share of them. But, why these for the
Ithacan? who, by stealth and unarmed, ever does his work, and deceives
the unwary enemy by stratagem? The very brilliancy of his helmet, as it
sparkles with bright gold, will betray his plans, and discover him as he
lies hid. But neither will the Dulichian 21 head, beneath the
helm of Achilles, sustain a weight so great; and the spear 22 from
Pelion must be heavy and burdensome for unwarlike arms. Nor will the
shield, embossed with the form of the great globe, beseem a dastard left
hand, and one formed for theft. Why then , caitiff, dost thou ask
for a gift that will but weaken thee? should the mistake of the
Grecian people bestow it on thee, there would be a cause for thee to be
stripped, not for thee to be dreaded by the enemy. Thy flight, too, (in
which, alone, most dastardly wretch ! thou dost excel all others ,) will be retarded, when dragging a load so 444 xiii. 116-146. great. Besides, that shield of thine, which has so rarely experienced
the conflict, is unhurt; for mine, which is gaping in a thousand wounds
from bearing the darts, a new successor must be obtained. In fine,
what need is there for words? Let us be tried in action. Let the arms of
that brave hero be thrown in the midst of the enemy: order them to be
fetched thence, and adorn him that brings them back, with them so
brought off.” The son of Telamon had now ended, and a murmur among the
multitude ensued upon his closing words, until the Laërtian hero stood
up, and fixing his eyes, for a short time, on the ground, raised them
towards the chiefs, and opened his mouth in the accents that were looked
for; nor was gracefulness wanting to his eloquent words. “If my prayers had been of any avail together with yours, Pelasgians,
the successor to a prize so great would not now be in question,
and thou wouldst now be enjoying thine arms, and we thee,
O Achilles. But since the unjust Fates have denied him to me and to
yourselves, (and here he wiped his eyes with his hands as though
shedding tears,) who could better succeed the great Achilles than he through
whom 23 the great Achilles joined the Greeks? Only let it
not avail him that he seems to be as stupid as he really is; and
let not my talents, which ever served you, O Greeks, be a prejudice
to me: and let this eloquence of mine, if there is any, which now pleads
for its possessor, and has often done so for yourselves, stand
clear of envy, and let each man not disown his own advantages. For as
to descent and ancestors, and the things which we have not made
ourselves, I scarce call these our own. But, indeed, since Ajax
boasts that he is the great grandson of Jove, Jupiter, too, is the
founder of my family, and by just as many degrees am I distant from him.
For Laërtes is my father, Arcesius his, Jupiter his; nor was any one of
these ever condemned 24 and banished. Through the
mother, 25 too, 445 xiii. 146-167. Cyllenian Mercury , another noble stock, is added to myself. On
the side of either parent there was a God. But neither because I am more
nobly born on my mother’s side, nor because my father is innocent of his
brother’s blood, do I claim the arms now in question. By personal merit weigh the cause. So that it be no merit in Ajax
that Telamon and Peleus were brothers; and so that not
consanguinity, but the honour of merit, be regarded in the disposal
of these spoils. Or if nearness of relationship and the next heir is
sought, Peleus is his sire, and Pyrrhus is his son. What room, then , is there for Ajax? Let them be taken to Phthia 26 or to
Scyros. Nor is Teucer 27 any less a cousin of Achilles than he; and
yet does he sue for, does he expect to bear away the arms? “Since then the contest is simply one of deeds; I, in truth, have
done more than what it is easy for me to comprise in words. Yet I shall
proceed in the order of events. Thetis , the Nereid mother,
prescient of coming death, conceals her son by his dress. The disguise
of the assumed dress deceived all, among whom was Ajax. Amid woman’s
trinkets I mixed arms such as would affect the mind of a man. And not
yet had the hero thrown aside the dress of a maiden, when, as he was
brandishing a shield and a spear, I said, ‘O son of a Goddess,
Pergamus reserves itself to fall through thee. Why, then , dost
thou delay to overthrow the mighty Troy?’ And then I laid my
hands on him, and to brave deeds I sent forth the brave. His deeds then
are my own. ’Twas I that subdued Telephus, as he fought with his lance;
’twas I that recovered him, vanquished, and begging for his life .
That Thebes has fallen, is my doing. Believe me, that I took Lesbos,
that I took Tenedos, Chrysa 28 and Cylla, cities of Apollo, and
Scyros too . Consider too, that the Lyrnessian 29 446 xiii. 176-208. walls were levelled with the ground, shaken by my right hand. And, not
to mention other things, ’twas I, in fact, that found one who might slay
the fierce Hector; through me the renowned Hector lies prostrate. By
those arms through which Achilles was found out, I demand these
arms. To him when living I gave them; after his death I ask them back
again. “After the grief of one 30 had reached all the Greeks, and a
thousand ships had filled the Eubœan Aulis, the breezes long expected
were either not existing or adverse to the fleet; and the ruthless
oracles commanded Agamemnon to slay his innocent daughter for the cruel
Diana. This the father refuses, and is enraged against the Gods
themselves, and, a king, he is still a father. By my words I swayed
the gentle disposition of the parent to the public advantage. Now,
indeed, I make this confession, and let the son of Atreus forgive
me as I confess it; before a partial judge I upheld a difficult cause.
Yet the good of the people and his brother, and the supreme power of the
sceptre granted to him, influence him to balance praise against blood.
I was sent, too, to the mother, who was not to be persuaded, but to
be deceived with craft; to whom, if the son of Telamon had gone, until
even now would our sails have been without wind. A bold envoy, too,
I was sent to the towers of Ilium, and the senate-house of lofty
Troy was seen and entered by me; and still was it filled with their
heroes. Undaunted, I pleaded the cause which all Greece had
entrusted to me; and I accused Paris, and I demanded back the plunder,
and Helen as well ; and I moved Priam and Antenor 31 , related to
Priam. But Paris and his brothers, and those who, under him, had been
ravishers, scarce withheld their wicked hands; and this thou
knowest, Menelaüs, and that was the first day of my danger in company
with thee. It were a tedious matter to relate the things which, by my
counsel and my valour, I have successfully executed in the duration
of this tedious warfare. “After the first encounter, the enemy for a long time kept themselves
within the walls of the city, and there was 447 xiii. 209-237. no opportunity for open fight. At length, in the tenth year we fought. And what wast thou doing in the mean time, thou, who knowest of
nothing but battles? what was the use of thee? But if thou inquirest
into my actions: I lay ambuscades for the enemy; I surround
the trenches 32 with redoubts; I cheer our allies that they may
bear with patient minds the tediousness of a protracted war;
I show, too , how we are to be supported, and how to be
armed; I am sent 33 whither necessity requires. Lo! by the advice
of Jove, the king, deceived by a form in his sleep, commands him to
dismiss all care of the war thus begun. He is enabled, through
the author of it, to defend his own cause. Ajax should not have allowed
this, and should have demanded that Troy be razed. And he should have
fought, the only thing he could do. Why, does he not stop them
when about to depart? Why does he not take up arms, and why not suggest some course for the fickle multitude to pursue? This was not too
much for him, who never says any thing but what is grand. Well, and
didst thou take to flight? I was witness of it, and ashamed I was
to see, when thou wast turning thy back, and wast preparing the sails of
disgrace. Without delay, I exclaimed, ‘What are you doing? What
madness made you, O my friends, quit Troy, well nigh taken?
And what, in this tenth year, are you carrying home but disgrace?’ “With these and other words , for which grief itself had made
me eloquent, I brought back the resisting Greeks from the
flying fleet. The son of Atreus calls together his allies, struck with
terror; nor, even yet, does the son of Telamon dare to utter a word; yet
Thersites 34 dares to launch out against the kings with impudent
remarks, although not unpunished by myself. I am aroused, and I
incite the trembling citizens against the foe, and by my voice I reclaim
their lost courage. From that time, whatever that man, whom I drew away
as he 448 xiii. 237-266. was turning his back, may seem to have done bravely, is all my
own. In fine, who of the Greeks is either praising thee, or resorts to
thee; but with me the son of Tydeus shares his exploits; he praises me,
and is ever confident while Ulysses is his companion. It is something,
out of so many thousands of the Greeks, to be singled out alone by
Diomedes. Nor was it lot that ordered me to go forth; and yet, despising
the dangers of the night and of the enemy, I slew Dolon, one of the Phrygian race, who dared the same things that we dared ;
though not before I had compelled him 35 to disclose everything, and
had learned what perfidious Troy designed. Everything had I now discovered, and I had nothing further to find out, and I might
now have returned, with my praises going before me. Not content with
that, I sought the tent of Rhesus, and in his own camp slew himself
and his attendants. And thus, as a conqueror, and having gained my own
desires, I returned in the captured chariot, resembling a joyous
triumph. Deny me the arms of him whose horses the enemy had demanded as
the price for one night’s service; and let Ajax be esteemed your greater benefactor. “Why should I make reference to the troops of Lycian Sarpedon, 36 mowed down by my sword? With much bloodshed I slew
Cœranos, the son of Iphitus, and Alastor, and Chromius, and Alcander,
and Halius, and Noëmon, and Prytanis, and I put to death Thoön, with
Chersidamas, and Charops, and Ennomos, impelled by his relentless fate;
five of less renown fell by my hand beneath the city walls. I, too,
fellow-citizens, have wounds, honourable in their place. 37 Believe not his crafty words; here! behold them.” And then , with his
hand, he pulls aside his garment, and, “this is the breast,” says he,
“that has been ever employed in your service.” “But the son of Telamon has spent none of his blood on his friends
for so many years, and he has a body without a 449 xiii. 266-299. single wound. 38 But what signifies that, if he says that he
bore arms for the Pelasgian fleet against both the Trojans and Jupiter
himself? I confess it, he did bear them; nor is it any part of mine
with malice to detract from the good deeds of others; but let him
not alone lay claim to what belongs to all, and let him give to
yourselves, as well, some of the honour. The descendant of Actor, safe
under the appearance of Achilles, repelled the Trojans, with their
defender, from the ships on the point of being burnt. He, too, unmindful
of the king, and of the chiefs, and of myself, fancies that he alone
dared to engage 39 with Hector in combat, being the ninth in that duty,
and preferred by favour of the lot. But yet, most brave chief ,
what was the issue of thy combat? Hector came off, injured by no wound.
Ah, wretched me! with how much grief am I compelled to recollect that
time at which Achilles, the bulwark of the Greeks, was slain: nor tears,
nor grief, nor fear, hindered me from carrying his body aloft from the
ground; on these shoulders, I say, on these shoulders I bore the
body of Achilles, and his arms together with him , which now, too,
I am endeavouring to bear off. I have strength to suffice for
such a weight, and , assuredly, I have a soul that will be
sensible of your honours. “Was then, forsooth! his azure mother so anxious in her son’s
behalf that the heavenly gifts, a work of so great ingenuity,
a rough soldier, and one without any genius, should put on? For he
will not understand the engravings on the shield; the ocean, and the
earth, and the stars with the lofty heavens and the Pleïades, and the
Hyades, and the Bear that avoids the sea, and the different cities, and
the blazing sword of Orion; arms he insists on receiving, which he does
not understand. What! and does he charge that I, avoiding the duties of
this laborious war, came but late to the toil begun? and does he not
perceive that in this he is defaming the brave Achilles? If he
calls dissembling a crime, we have both of us dissembled. 450 xiii. 299-336. If delay stands for a fault, I was earlier than he.
A fond wife detained me, a fond mother Achilles. The first
part of our time was given to them, the rest to yourselves. I am
not alarmed, if now I am unable to defend myself against this
accusation, in common with so great a man. Yet he was found out by the
dexterity of Ulysses, but not Ulysses by that of Ajax. “And that we may not be surprised at his pouring out on me the
reproaches of his silly tongue, against you, too, does he make
objections worthy of shame. Is it base for me, with a false crime to
have charged Palamedes, and honourable for you to have condemned
him? But neither could Palamedes , the son of Nauplius, defend a
crime so great, and so manifest; nor did you only hear the
charges against him, but you witnessed them, and in the bribe itself the charge was established. Nor have I deserved to be
accused, because Lemnos, the isle of Vulcan, still receives Philoctetes , the son of Pœas. Greeks , defend your
own acts! for you consented to it. Nor yet shall I deny that I advised
him to withdraw himself from the toils of the warfare and the voyage,
and to try by rest to assuage his cruel pains. He consented, and still he lives. This advice was not only well-meant, but it
was fortunate as well, when ’twas enough to be well-meant. Since our
prophets demand him for the purpose of destroying Troy, entrust not that
to me. The son of Telamon will be better to go, and by his eloquence
will soften the hero, maddened by diseases and anger, or by some wile
will skilfully bring him thence. Sooner will Simoïs flow backward, and
Ida stand without foliage, and Achaia promise aid to Troy, than, my
breast being inactive in your interest, the skill of stupid Ajax shall
avail the Greeks. “Though thou be, relentless Philoctetes, enraged against thy friends
and the king, and myself, though thou curse and devote my head,
everlastingly, and though thou wish to have me in thy anguish thrown in
thy way perchance, and to shed my blood; and though if I meet thee, so
thou wilt have the opportunity of meeting me, still will I attempt thee, and will endeavour to bring thee back with me. And, if
Fortune favours me, I will as surely be the possessor of thy
arrows, as I was the possessor of the Dardanian prophet 40 whom I took prisoner; and so I revealed the answers of the Deities and the
fates of Troy; 451 xiii. 337-362. and as I carried off the hidden statue 41 of the Phrygian
Minerva from the midst of the enemy. And does Ajax, then , compare
himself with me? The Fates, in fact, would not allow Troy to be captured
without that statue . Where is the valiant Ajax? where are the
boastful words of that mighty man? Why art thou trembling here? Why
dares Ulysses to go through the guards, and to entrust himself to the
night, and, through fell swords, to enter not only the walls of Troy,
but even its highest towers, and to tear the Goddess from her shrine,
and, thus torn, to bear her off amid the enemy? “Had I not done these things, in vain would the son of Telamon been
bearing the seven hides of the bulls on his left arm. On that night was
the victory over Troy gained by me; then did I conquer Pergamus, when I
rendered it capable of being conquered. Forbear by thy looks, 42 and
thy muttering, to show me the son of Tydeus; a part of the glory in
these things is his own. Neither wast thou alone, when for the allied
fleet thou didst grasp thy shield: a multitude was attending thee, while but one fell to me: who, did he not know that a fighting
man is of less value than a wise one, and that the reward is not the due
of the invincible right hand, would himself, too, have been suing for
these arms ; the more discreet Ajax would have been suing, and the
fierce Eurypilus, 43 and the son of the famous Andremon; 44 no
less, too would Idomeneus, 45 and Meriones 46 sprung from the
same land, and the brother of the greater son of Atreus have sought
them. But these, brave in action, (nor are they second to thee in war,)
have all yielded to my wisdom. Thy right hand is of value in war, 452 xiii. 362-397. but thy temper is one that stands in need of my direction. Thou
hast strength without intelligence; I have a care for the future.
Thou art able to fight; with me, the son of Atreus chooses the proper time for fighting. Thou only art of service with thy body;
I with my mind: and as much as he who guides the bark, is superior
to the capacity of the rower, as much as the general is greater than the
soldier, so much do I excel thee; and in my body there is an intellect
that is superior to hands: in that lies all my vigour. “But you, ye chieftains, give the reward to your watchful servant; and for the cares of so many years which I have passed
in anxiety, grant this honour as a compensation for my services. Our
toil is now at its close; I have removed the opposing Fates, and by
rendering it capable of being taken, in effect I have taken the
lofty Pergamus. Now, by our common hopes, and the walls of the Trojans
doomed to fall, and by those Gods whom lately I took from the enemy, by
anything that remains, through wisdom to be done; if, too, anything remains of bold enterprize, and to be recovered from a dangerous
spot; if you think that anything is still wanting for the downfall of
Troy; then remember me; or if you give not me the arms, concede
them to this;” and then he discovers the fatal statue of
Minerva. The body of the chiefs is moved, and then , in fact appears
what eloquence can do; and the fluent man receives the arms of a brave
one. He, who so often has alone withstood both Hector, and the sword,
and flames, and Jove himself , cannot now withstand his
wrath alone, and grief conquers the man that is invincible. He seizes
his sword, and he says:— “This, at least, is my own; or will
Ulysses claim this, too, for himself. This must I use against myself;
and the blade , which has often been wet with the blood of the
Phrygians, will now be wet with the slaughter of its owner: that no one
but Ajax himself , may be enabled to conquer Ajax.” Thus he said; and he plunged the fatal sword into his breast,
then for the first time suffering a wound, where it lay exposed to the
steel. Nor were his hands able to draw out the weapon there fixed: the
blood itself forced it out. And the earth, made red by the blood,
produced a purple flower from the green turf, the same which had
formerly been produced from the Œbalian wound. Letters common to that youth 453 xiii. 397-426. and to the hero, were inscribed in the middle of the leaves; the latter belonging to the name, 47 the former to the lamentation. The conqueror, Ulysses, set sail for the country of Hypsipyle, 48 and of the illustrious Thoas, and the regions
infamous for the slaughter there of the husbands of old; that he
might bring back the arrows, the weapons of the Tirynthian hero .
After he had carried them back to the Greeks, their owner attending too,
the concluding hand was put, at length, to this protracted war. Troy and
Priam fell together; the wretched wife of Priam lost after every thing else her human form, and alarmed a foreign air 49 with her
barkings. Where the long Hellespont is reduced into a narrow compass,
Ilion was in flames; nor had the flames yet ceased; and the altar of
Jove had drank up the scanty blood of the aged Priam. The priestess of
Apollo 50 dragged by the hair, extends her unavailing hands
towards the heavens. The victorious Greeks drag along the Dardanian
matrons, embracing, while they may, the statues of their country’s Gods,
and clinging to the burning temples, an envied spoil. Astyanax 51 is
hurled from those towers from which he was often wont, when shown by his
mother, to behold his father, fighting for himself, and defending the
kingdom of his ancestors. And now Boreas bids them depart, and with a favourable breeze, the
sails, as they wave, resound, and the sailors bid them take
advantage of the winds. “Troy, farewell!” the Trojan women cry;—
“We are torn away!” and they give kisses to the soil, and leave the
smoking roofs of their country. The last that goes on board the fleet,
a dreadful sight, is Hecuba, found amid the sepulchres of her
children. Dulichian hands have dragged her away, while clinging to their
tombs and giving kisses to their bones; yet the ashes of one has she
taken out, 454 xiii. 426-438. and, so taken out, has carried with her in her bosom the ashes of
Hector. On the tomb of Hector she leaves the grey hair of her head, an
humble offering, her hair and her tears. There is opposite to Phrygia,
where Troy stood, a land inhabited by the men of Bistonia. There,
was the rich palace of Polymnestor, to whom thy father, Polydorus,
entrusted thee, to be brought up privately, and removed thee afar from the Phrygian arms. A wise resolution; had he not added, as
well , great riches, the reward of crime, the incentive of an
avaricious disposition. When the fortunes of the Phrygians were ruined,
the wicked king of the Phrygians took a sword, and plunged it in the
throat of his fosterchild; and, as though the crime could be removed
with the body, he hurled him lifeless from a rock into the waters
below. EXPLANATION. It may with justice be said, that in the speeches of Ajax Telamon, and
Ulysses, here given, the Poet has presented us with a masterpiece of
genius; both in the lively colours in which he has described the two
rivals, and the ingenious manner in which he has throughout sustained
the contrast between their respective characters. The ancient writers are not agreed upon the question, who was the mother
of Ajax Telamon; Dares says that it was Hesione; while Apollodorus,
Plutarch, Tzetzes and others, allege that it was Peribœa, the daughter
of Alcathoüs, the son of Pelops. Pindar and Apollodorus say, that
Hercules, on going to visit his friend Telamon, prayed to Jupiter that
Telamon might have a son, whose skin should be as impenetrable as that
of the Nemæan lion, which he then wore. As he prayed, he espied an
eagle; upon which, he informed his friend that a favourable event
awaited his prayer, and desired him to call his son after the name of an
eagle, which in the Greek is αἰετὸς . The Scholiast on Sophocles, Suidas and Tzetzes,
say further, that when Hercules returned to see Telamon, after the birth
of Ajax, he covered him with the lion’s skin, and that by this means
Ajax became invulnerable except in that spot of his body, which was
beneath the hole which the arrow of Hercules had made in the skin of the
beast. Dictys, Suidas, and Cedrenus affirm, that the dispute of Ulysses and
Ajax Telamon was about the Palladium, to which each of them laid claim.
They add, that the Grecian nobles, having adjudged it to Ulysses, Ajax
threatened to slay them, and was found dead in his tent the next
morning; but it is more generally stated to the effect here related by
Ovid, that he killed himself, because he could not obtain the armour of
Achilles. Filled with grief and anger combined, he became distracted;
and after falling on some flocks, which in his madness he took for
enemies, he at last stabbed himself with the sword which he had received
from Hector. This account has been followed by Euripides, in his tragedy
on the subject of the death of Ajax; and Homer seems to allude to this
story, when he makes Ulysses say, that on his descent to the Infernal
Regions, the shades of all 455 the Grecian heroes immediately met him, except that of Ajax, whose
resentment at their former dispute about the armour of Achilles was
still so warm, that he would not come near him. The Scholiast on Homer,
and Eustathius, say that Agamemnon being much embarrassed how to behave
in a dispute which might have proved fatal to the Grecian cause, ordered
the Trojan prisoners to come before the council to give their opinion,
as to which of them had done the most mischief; and that they answered
in favour of Ulysses. The Scholiast on Aristophanes also adds, that
Agamemnon, not satisfied with this enquiry, sent out spies to know what
was the opinion of the Trojans on the relative merits of Ulysses and
Ajax; and that upon their report, he decided in favour of Ulysses. According to Pliny and Pausanias, Ajax was buried near the promontory of
Sigæum, where a tomb was erected for him; though other writers, on the
authority of Dictys, place his tomb on the promontory of Rhœtæum. Horace
speaks of him as being denied the honour of a funeral; but he evidently
alludes to a passage in the tragedy of Sophocles, where the poet
introduces Agamemnon as obstinately refusing to allow him burial, till
he is softened by the entreaties of Teucer. It is probable that Homer knew nothing of the story here mentioned
relative to the concealment of Achilles, disguised in female apparel, by
Thetis, in the court of Lycomedes, her brother; for speaking of the
manner in which Achilles engaged in the war, he says that Nestor and
Ulysses went to visit Peleus and Menœtius, and easily prevailed with
them that Achilles and Patroclus should accompany them to the war. It
was, however, at the court of Lycomedes that Achilles fell in love with
and married Deidamia, by whom he had Pyrrhus, or Neoptolemus, who was
present at the taking of Troy, at a very early age. The story of Polydorus is related in the third Book of the Æneid, and is
also told by Hyginus, with some variations. He says that Polydorus was
sent by Priam to Polymnestor, king of Thrace, while he was yet in his
cradle; and that Ilione, the daughter of Priam, distrusting the cruelty
and avarice of Polymnestor, who was her husband, educated the child as
her own son, and made their own son Deiphylus pass for Polydorus, the
two infants being of the same age. He also says that the Greeks, after
the taking of Troy, offered Electra to Polymnestor in marriage, on
condition that he should divorce Ilione, and slay Polydorus, and that
Polymnestor, having acceded to their proposal, unconsciously killed his
own son Deiphylus. Polydorus going to consult the oracle concerning his
future fortune, was told, that his father was dead, and his native city
reduced to ashes; on which he imagined that the oracle had deceived him;
but returning to Thrace, his sister informed him of the secret, on which
he deprived Polymnestor of his sight . FABLES III. AND IV. In returning from Troy, the Greeks are
stopped in Thrace by the shade of Achilles, who requests that Polyxena
shall be sacrificed to his manes. While Hecuba is fetching water with
which to bathe the body of her daughter, she espies the corpse of her
son Polydorus. In her exasperations 456 xiii. 439-472. she repairs to the court of Polymnestor; and having torn out his eyes,
is transformed into a bitch. Memnon, who has been slain by Achilles, is
honoured with a magnificent funeral, and, at the prayer of Aurora, his
ashes are transformed by Jupiter into birds, since called
Memnonides. On the Thracian shore the son of Atreus had moored his fleet, until
the sea was calm, and until the wind was more propitious. Here,
on a sudden, Achilles, as great as he was wont to be when alive, rises
from the ground, bursting far and wide, and, like to one threatening,
revives the countenance of that time when he fiercely attacked Agamemnon
with his lawless sword. “And are you departing, unmindful of me, ye
Greeks?” he says; “and is all grateful remembrance of my valour buried
together with me? Do not so. And that my sepulchre may not be without
honour, let Polyxena slain appease the ghost of Achilles.” Thus he said; and his companions obeying the implacable shade, the noble and
unfortunate maid, and more than an ordinary woman, torn from the
bosom of her mother, which she now cherished almost alone, was led to
the tomb, and became a sacrifice at his ruthless pile. She, mindful of herself, after she was brought to the cruel altar,
and had perceived that the savage rites were preparing for her; and when
she saw Neoptolemus standing by , and wielding his sword, and
fixing his eyes upon her countenance, said— “Quickly make use of
this noble blood: in me there is no resistance: and do thou bury
thy weapons either in my throat or in my breast!” and, at the same time
she laid bare her throat and her breast; “should I, Polyxena,
forsooth, 52 either endure to be the slave of any person, or will
any sacred Deity be appeased by such a sacrifice. I only wish that
my death could be concealed from my mother. My mother is the impediment;
and she lessens my joys at death. Yet it is not my death, but her own
life, that should be lamented by her. Only, stand ye off, lest I should
go to the Stygian shades not a free woman: if in this I demand
what is just; and withhold the hands of males from the contact of a
virgin. My blood will be the more acceptable to him, whoever it is that
you are preparing to appease by my slaughter. Yet, if the last prayers
of my lips move any of you,—’tis the daughter of king Priam, and not a captive that entreats—return 457 xiii. 472-505. my body unconsumed to my mother, and let her not purchase for me with
gold, but with tears, the sad privilege of a sepulchre. When in
former times she could, then used she to purchase with gold.” Thus she said; but the people did not restrain those tears
which she restrained. Even the priest himself, weeping and reluctant,
divided her presented breast with the piercing steel. She, sinking to
the earth on her failing knees, maintained an undaunted countenance to
the last moment of her life. Even then was it her care, when she fell,
to cover the features that ought to be concealed, and to preserve the
honour of her chaste modesty. The Trojan matrons received her, and
reckoned the children of Priam whom they had had to deplore; and how
much blood one house had expended. And they lament thee, Oh virgin! and
thee, Oh thou! so lately called a royal wife and a royal mother, once the resemblance of flourishing Asia, but now a worthless
prey amid the plunder of Troy ; which the conquering Ulysses would
have declined as his, but that thou hadst brought Hector forth. And scarce did Hector find an owner for his mother. She,
embracing the body bereft of a soul so brave, gave to that as well,
those tears which so oft she had given for her country, her children,
and her husband; and her tears she poured in his wounds. And she
impressed kisses with her lips, and beat her breast now accustomed to it; and trailing her grey hairs in the clotted blood, many
things indeed did she say, but these as well, as she tore her
breast: “My daughter, the last affliction (for what now remains?) to thy
mother: my daughter, thou liest prostrate, and I behold thy wound as my own wounds. Lo! lest I should have lost any one of my
children without bloodshed, thou, too, dost receive thy wound. Still,
because thou wast a woman, I supposed thee safe from the
sword; and yet , a woman, thou hast fallen by the sword. The
same Achilles, the ruin of Troy, and the bereaver of myself, the same
has destroyed thus many of thy brothers, and thyself. But, after
he had fallen by the arrows of Paris and of Phœbus, ‘Now, at least,’
I said, ‘Achilles is no longer to be dreaded;’ and yet even
now, was he to be dreaded by me. The very ashes of him, as he lies
buried, rage against this family; and even in the tomb have we
found him an enemy. For the descendant of Æacus have I been thus prolific. 458 xiii. 505-536. Great Ilion lies prostrate, and the public calamity is completed by a
dreadful catastrophe; if indeed, it is completed. Pergamus alone remains
for me: and my sorrow is still in its career. So lately the greatest
woman in the world, powerful in so many sons-in-law, and children 53 , and daughters-in-law, and in my husband, now I am
dragged into exile, destitute, and torn away from the tombs of my
kindred, as a present to Penelope. She, pointing me out to the matrons
of Ithaca, as I tease my allotted task, will say, ‘This is that famous
mother of Hector; this is the wife of Priam.’ And, now thou, who after
the loss of so many children , alone didst alleviate the sorrows
of thy mother, hast made the atonement at the tomb of the enemy. Atoning
sacrifices for an enemy have I brought forth. For what purpose, lasting
like iron, am I reserved? and why do I linger here ? To what end
dost thou, pernicious age, detain me? Why, ye cruel Deities, unless to
the end that I may see fresh deaths, do ye reprieve an aged woman of
years so prolonged? Who could have supposed, that after the fall of
Troy, Priam could have been pronounced happy? Blessed in his death, he
has not beheld thee, my daughter, thus cut off; and at the same
moment, he lost his life and his kingdom. “But, I suppose, thou, a maiden of royal birth, wilt be honoured
with funeral rites, and thy body will be deposited in the tombs of thy
ancestors. This is not the fortune of thy house; tears and a handful of
foreign sand will be thy lot, the only gifts of a mother. We have
lost all; a child most dear to his mother, now alone remains as a
reason for me to endure to live yet for a short time, once the youngest
of all my male issue, Polydorus, entrusted on these coasts to the
Ismarian king. Why, in the mean time, am I delaying to bathe her cruel
wounds with the stream, her features, too, besmeared with dreadful
blood?” Thus she spoke; and with aged step she proceeded towards the
shore, tearing her grey locks. “Give me an urn, ye Trojan women,” the
unhappy mother had just said, in order that she might take up the
flowing waters, when she beheld 54 459 xiii. 536-571. the body of Polydorus thrown up on the shore, and the great wounds made
by the Thracian weapons. The Trojan women cried out aloud; with grief
she was struck dumb; and very grief consumed both her voice and the
tears that arose within; and much resembling a hard rock she became
benumbed. And at one moment she fixed her eyes on the ground before her; and sometimes she raised her haggard features towards the skies; and now she viewed the features, now the wounds of her son, as he
lay; the wounds especially; and she armed and prepared herself for
vengeance by rage. Soon as she was inflamed by it, as though she still remained a queen, she determined to be revenged, and was
wholly employed in devising a fitting form of
punishment. And as the lioness rages when bereft of her sucking whelp,
and having found the tracks of his feet, follows the enemy that she sees
not; so Hecuba, after she had mingled rage with mourning, not forgetful
of her spirit, but forgetful of her years, went to Polymnestor,
the contriver of this dreadful murder, and demanded an interview; for
that it was her wish to show him a concealed treasure left for him to
give to her son. The Odrysian king believes her, and, inured to the love of
gain, comes to a secret spot. Then with soothing lips, he craftily says,
“Away with delays, Hecuba, and give the present to thy son; all
that thou givest, and what thou hast already given, I swear by the
Gods above, shall be his.” Sternly she eyes him as he speaks, and
falsely swears; and she boils with heaving rage; and so flies on him,
seized by a throng of the captive matrons, and thrusts her fingers into
his perfidious eyes; and of their sight she despoils his cheeks, and
plunges her hands into the sockets , (’tis rage that makes her
strong); and, defiled with his guilty blood, she tears not his eyes, for
they are not left, but the places for his eyes. Provoked by the death of their king, the Thracian people begin to
attack the Trojan matron with the hurling of darts and of stones.
But she attacks the stones thrown at her with a hoarse noise, and with
bites; and attempting to speak, her mouth just ready for the words, she
barks aloud. The place still exists, and derives its name 55 from the circumstance; and long remembering her ancient misfortunes,
even then did 460 xiii. 571-612. she howl dismally through the Sithonian plains. Her sad fortune
moved both her own Trojans, and her Pelasgian foes, and all the Gods as
well; so much so, that even the wife and sister of Jove herself denied
that Hecuba had deserved that fate. Although she has favoured those same arms, there is not leisure for
Aurora to be moved by the calamities and the fall of Troy. A nearer
care and grief at home for her lost Memnon is afflicting her. Him his
rosy-coloured mother saw perish by the spear of Achilles on the Phrygian
plains. This she saw; and that colour with which the hours of the
morning grow ruddy, turned pale, and the æther lay hid in clouds. But
the parent could not endure to behold his limbs laid on the closing
flames. But with loose hair, just as she was, she disdained not to fall
down at the knees of great Jove, and to add these words to her tears:
“Inferior to all the Goddesses which the golden æther does
sustain, (for throughout all the world are my temples the fewest),
still, a Goddess, I am come; not that thou shouldst grant me
temples and days of sacrifice, and altars to be heated with fires. But
if thou considerest how much I, a female, perform for thee, at the
time when, with the early dawn, I keep the confines of the night,
thou wouldst think that some reward ought to be given to me. But that is
not my care, nor is such now the condition of Aurora such that she
should demand the honours deserved by her. Bereft of my Memnon am I
come; of him who, in vain, wielded valiant arms for his uncle,
and who in his early years (’twas thus ye willed it,) was slain by the
brave Achilles. Give him, I pray, supreme ruler of the Gods, some
honour, as a solace for his death, and ease the wounds of a mother.” Jove nods his assent; when suddenly the lofty pile of Memnon
sinks with its towering fires, and volumes of black smoke darken the light of day. Just as when the rivers exhale the rising fogs, and
the sun is not admitted below them. The black embers fly, and rolling
into one body, they thicken, and take a form, and assume heat and life
from the flames. Their own lightness gives them wings; and first, like
birds, and then real birds, they flutter with their wings. At
once innumerable sisters are fluttering, whose natal origin is the same.
And thrice do they go around the pile, and thrice does their clamour
rise in concert into the air. In the fourth flight they separate their
company. Then two fierce tribes 461 xiii. 612-622. wage war from opposite sides, and with their beaks and crooked claws
expend their rage, and weary their wings and opposing breasts; and down
their kindred bodies fall, a sacrifice to the entombed ashes, and
they remember that from a great man they have received their birth.
Their progenitor gives a name to these birds so suddenly formed, called
Memnonides after him; when the Sun has run through the twelve signs of the Zodiac , they fight, doomed to perish in battle, in honour
of their parent. 56 To others, therefore, it seemed a sad thing, that the daughter of
Dymas was now barking; but Aurora was intent on her own
sorrows; and even now she sheds the tears of affection, and sprinkles
them in dew over all the world. EXPLANATION. The particulars which Ovid here gives of the misfortunes that befell the
family of Priam, with the exception of a few circumstances, agree
perfectly with the narratives of the ancient historians. According to Dictys, Philostratus, and Hyginus, after Achilles was slain
by the treachery of Paris, on the eve of his marriage with Polyxena, she
became inconsolable at his death, and returning to the Grecian camp, she
was kindly received by Agamemnon; but being unable to get the better of
her despair, she stole out of the camp at night, and stabbed herself at
the tomb of Achilles. Philostratus adds, that the ghost of Achilles
appeared to Apollonius Tyanæus, the hero of his story, and gave him
permission to ask him any questions he pleased, assuring him, that he
would give him full information on the subject of them. Among other
things, Apollonius desired to know if it was the truth that the Greeks
had sacrificed Polyxena on his tomb; to which the ghost replied, that
her grief made her take the resolution not to survive her intended
husband, and that she had killed herself. Other writers, agreeing with Ovid as to the manner of her death, tell us
that it was Pyrrhus who sacrificed Polyxena to his father’s shade, to
revenge his death, of which, though innocently, she had been the cause.
Pausanias, who says that this was the general opinion, avers, on what
ground it is difficult to conceive, that Homer designedly omitted this
fact, because it was so dishonourable to the Greeks; and in his
description of the paintings at Delphi, by Polygnotus, of the
destruction of Troy, he says that Polyxena was there represented as
being led out to the tomb of Achilles, where she was sacrificed by the
Greeks. He also says, that he had seen her story painted in the same
manner at Pergamus, Athens, and other places. Many of the poets, and
Virgil in the number, affirm 462 that Polyxena was sacrificed in Phrygia, near Troy, on the tomb of
Achilles, he having desired it at his death; while Euripides says that
it was in the Thracian Chersonesus, on a cenotaph, which was erected
there in honour of Achilles: and that his ghost appearing, Calchas was
consulted, who answered, that it was necessary to sacrifice Polyxena,
which was accordingly done by Pyrrhus. The ancient writers are divided as to the descent of Hecuba. Homer, who
has been followed by his Scholiast, and by Ovid and Suidas, says that
she was the daughter of Dymas, King of Phrygia. Euripides says that she
was the daughter of Cisscus, and with him Virgil and Servius agree.
Apollodorus, again, makes her to be descended from Sangar and Merope. In
the distribution of spoil after the siege of Troy, Hecuba fell to the
share of Ulysses, and became his slave; but died soon after, in Thrace.
Plautus and Servius allege that the Greeks themselves circulated the
story of her transformation into a bitch, because she was perpetually
railing at them, to provoke them to put her to death, rather than
condemn her to pass her life as a slave. According to Strabo and
Pomponius Mela, in their time, the place of her burial was still to be
seen in Thrace. Euripides, in his Hecuba, has not followed this
tradition, but represents her as complaining that the Greeks had chained
her to the door of Agamemnon like a dog. Perhaps she became the slave of
Agamemnon after Ulysses had left the army, on his return to Ithaca; and
it is possible that the story of her transformation may have been solely
founded on this tradition. She bore to Priam ten sons and seven
daughters, and survived them all except Helenus; most of her sons having
fallen by the hand of Achilles. Many ancient writers, with whom Ovid here agrees, affirm that Memnon was
the son of Tithonus, the brother of Priam, and Aurora, or Eos, the
Goddess of the morn. They also say that he came to assist the Trojans
with ten thousand Persians, and as many Æthiopians. Diodorus Siculus
asserts that Memnon was said to have been the son of Aurora, because he
left Phrygia, and went to settle in the East. It is not clear in what
country he fixed his residence. Some say that it was at Susa, in Persia;
others that it was in Egypt, or in Æthiopia, which perhaps amounts to
the same, as Æthiopia was not in general distinguished from the Higher
or Upper Egypt. Marsham is of opinion that Memnon was the same with
Amenophis, one of the kings of Egypt: while Le Clerc considers him to
have been the same person as Ham, the son of Noah; and Vossius
identifies him with Boalcis, a God of the Syrians. It seems
probable that he was an Egyptian, who had perhaps formed an alliance
with the reigning family of Troy. 463 xiii. 623-646. FABLES V. AND VI. After the taking of Troy, Æneas escapes
with his father and his son, and goes to Delos. Anius, the priest of
Apollo, recounts to him how his daughters have been transformed into
doves, and at parting they exchange presents. The Poet here introduces
the story of the daughters of Orion, who, having sacrificed their lives
for the safety of Thebes, when ravaged by a plague, two young men arise
out of their ashes. But yet the Fates do not allow the hope of Troy to be ruined even
with its walls. The Cytherean hero bears on his shoulders the sacred
relics and his father, another sacred relic, a venerable burden. In
his affection, out of wealth so great, he selects that prize, and his
own Ascanius, and with his flying fleet is borne through the seas from
Antandros, 57 and leaves the accursed thresholds of the Thracians,
and the earth streaming with the blood of Polydorus; and, with good
winds and favouring tide, he enters the city of Apollo, his companions
attending him. Anius, by whom, as king, men were, and by whom, as priest,
Phœbus was duly provided for, received him both into his temple and his
house, and showed him the city and the dedicated temples, and the two
trunks of trees once grasped 58 by Latona in her labour.
Frankincense being given to the flames, and wine poured forth on the
frankincense, and the entrails of slain oxen 59 being duly burnt,
they repair to the royal palace, and reclining on lofty couches, with
flowing wine, they take the gifts of Ceres. Then the pious Anchises says , “O chosen priest of Phœbus, am I deceived? or didst
thou not have a son, also, when first I beheld these walls, and twice
two daughters, so far as I remember?” To him Anius replies, shaking his
temples wreathed with snow-white fillets, and says, “Thou art not
mistaken, greatest hero; thou didst see me the parent of five children,
whom now (so great a vicissitude of fortune 464 xiii. 646-683. affects mankind) thou seest almost bereft of all . For what
assistance is my absent son to me, whom Andros, a land so called after his name, possesses, holding that place and kingdom on
behalf of his father? “The Delian God granted him the art of augury; to my
female progeny Liber gave other gifts, exceeding both wishes and
belief. For, at the touch of my daughters, all things were transformed
into corn, and the stream of wine, and the berry of Minerva; and in
these were there rich advantages. When the son of Atreus, the destroyer
of Troy, learned this (that thou mayst not suppose that we, too, did not
in some degree feel your storms) using the force of arms, he dragged
them reluctantly from the bosom of their father, and commanded them to
feed, with their heavenly gifts, the Argive fleet. Whither each of them
could, they made their escape. Eubœa was sought by two; and by as many
of my daughters, was Andros, their brother’s island , sought. The
forces came, and threatened war if they were not given up. Natural
affection, subdued by fear, surrendered to punishment those kindred
breasts; and, that thou mayst be able to forgive a timid brother, there
was no Æneas, no Hector to defend Andros, through whom you Trojans held out to the tenth year. And now chains were being
provided for their captive arms. Lifting up towards heaven their arms
still free, they said, ‘Father Bacchus, give us thy aid!’ and the author
of their gift did give them aid; if destroying them, in a wondrous
manner, be called giving aid. By what means they lost their shape,
neither could I learn, nor can I now tell. The sum of their calamity is
known to me : they assumed wings, and were changed into birds of
thy consort, 60 the snow-white doves.” With such and other discourse, after they have passed the time
of feasting, the table being removed, they seek sleep. And they rise
with the day, and repair to the oracle of Phœbus, who bids them seek the
ancient mother and the kindred shores. The king attends, and presents
them with gifts when about to depart; a sceptre to Anchises,
a scarf and a quiver to his grandson, and a goblet to Æneas,
which formerly Therses, his Ismenian guest, had sent him from the Aonian
shores; this 465 xiii. 683-712. Therses had sent to him, but the Mylean Alcon had made it, and
had carved it with this long device: There was a city, and you might point out its seven gates:
these were in place of 61 a name, and showed what city it
was. Before the city was a funeral, and tombs, and fires, and funeral
piles; and matrons, with hair dishevelled and naked breasts, expressed
their grief; the Nymphs, too, seem to be weeping, and to mourn their
springs dried up. Without foliage the bared tree runs straight up; the
goats are gnawing the dried stones. Lo! he represents the daughters of
Orion in the middle of Thebes; the one, as presenting her breast, more
than woman’s, with her bared throat; the other, thrusting a sword in her
valorous wounds, as dying for her people, and as being borne, with an
honoured funeral, through the city, and as being burnt in a conspicuous
part of it ; and then from the virgin embers, lest the race
should fail, twin youths arising, whom Fame calls ‘Coronæ,’ 62 and
for their mothers’ ashes leading the funeral procession. Thus far for the figures that shine on the ancient brass; the summit
of the goblet is rough with gilded acanthus. Nor do the Trojans return
gifts of less value than those given; and to the priest they give an
incense-box, to keep the frankincense; they give a bowl, too , and
a crown, brilliant with gold and gems. Then recollecting that the Trojans , as Teucrians, derived their origin from the blood
of Teucer, they make for Crete, and cannot long endure the air of that
place; 63 and, having left behind the hundred cities, they
desire to reach the Ausonian harbours. A storm rages, and tosses
the men to and fro; and winged Aëllo frightens them, when received in
the unsafe harbours of the Strophades. 64 And now, borne along, 466 xiii. 712-718. they have passed the Dulichian harbours, and Ithaca, and Same, 65 and
the Neritian abodes, the kingdom of the deceitful Ulysses; and they
behold Ambracia, 66 contended for in a dispute of the Deities, which
now is renowned for the Actian Apollo, 67 and the stone in the shape of
the transformed judge, and the land of Dodona, vocal with its oaks; and
the Chaonian bays, where the sons of the Molossian king escaped the
unavailing flames, with wings attached to them . EXPLANATION. Virgil describes Anius as the king of Delos, and the priest of Apollo at
the same time. ‘Rex Anius, rex idem hominum Phœbique sacerdos.’ Æneid,
Book III. He was descended from Cadmus, through his mother Rhea, the
daughter of Staphilus. Having engaged in some intrigue, as Diodorus
Siculus conjectures, her father exposed her on the sea in an open boat,
which drove to Delos, and she was there delivered of Anius, who
afterwards became the king of the island. By his wife Dorippe he had
three daughters, who were extremely frugal, and by means of the
offerings and presents that were brought to the temple of Apollo,
amassed a large store of provisions. During the siege of Troy, the
Greeks sent Palamedes to Delos, to demand food for the army; and, as a
security for his compliance with these demands, they exacted the
daughters of Anius as hostages. The damsels soon afterwards finding
means to escape, it was said that Bacchus, who was their kinsman through
Cadmus, had transformed them into doves. Probably the story of their
transforming every thing they touched, into wine, corn, and oil, was
founded solely on their thriftiness and parsimony. Bochart, however,
explains the story from the circumstance of their names being, as he
conjectures, Oëno, Spermo, and Elaï, which, in the old Phœnician
dialect, signified wine, corn, and oil; and he thinks that the story was
confirmed in general belief by the fact that large quantities of corn,
wine, and oil were supplied from Delos to the Grecian army when before
Troy. In the reign of Orion, Thebes being devastated by a plague, the oracles
were consulted, and the Thebans were told that the contagion would cease
as soon as the daughters of the king should be sacrificed to the wrath
of heaven. The two maidens immediately presented themselves at the
altar; and on their immolation, the Gods were appeased, and the plague
ceased. 467 This example of patriotism and fortitude filled the more youthful
Thebans with so much emulation, that they shook off their former
inactivity, and soon became conspicuous for their bravery: which sudden
change gave occasion to the saying, that the ashes of these maidens had
been transformed into men. The Poet follows Æneas on his voyage, to gain an opportunity of
referring to several other current stories. Among other places, he
passes the city of Ambracia, about which the Gods had contended, and
sees the rock into which the umpire of their dispute, who had decided in
favour of Hercules, was changed. Ambracia was on the coast of Epirus,
and gave its name to an adjacent inlet of the sea, called the Ambracian
Gulf. Antoninus Liberalis tells us, on the authority of Nicander, that
Apollo, Diana, and Hercules disputed about this city, and left the
decision to Cragaleus, who gave it in favour of Hercules; on which,
Apollo transformed him into a rock. Very possibly the meaning of this
may be, that when the people of Ambracia were considering to which of
these Deities they should dedicate their city, Cragaleus preferred
Hercules to the other two, or, in other words, the feats of war to the
cultivation of the arts and sciences. Apollo was said to have turned him
into a stone, either because he met with his death near the promontory
where a temple of Apollo stood, or to show the stupidity of his
decision. Antoninus Liberalis is the only writer besides Ovid that makes
mention of the adventure of the sons of the Molossian king; he tells us
that Munychus, king of the Molossi, had three sons, Alcander, Megaletor,
and Philæus, and a daughter named Hyperippe. Some robbers setting fire
to their father’s house, they were transformed by Jupiter into birds.
This, in all probability, is a poetical way of saying that the youths
escaped from the flames, contrary to universal expectation. The opinions of writers have been very conflicting as to the origin of
the oracle of Dodona. Silius Italicus says that two pigeons flew from
Thebes in Egypt, one of which went to Libya, and occasioned the founding
of the oracle of Jupiter Ammon; while the other settled upon an oak in
Chaonia, and signified thereby to the inhabitants, that it was the will
of heaven that there should be an oracle in that place. Herodotus says
that two priestesses of Egyptian Thebes being carried off by some
Phœnician merchants, one of them was sold to the Greeks, after which she
settled in the forest of Dodona, where a little chapel was founded by
her in honour of Jupiter, in which she gave responses. He adds, that
they called her ‘the dove,’ because being a foreigner they did not
understand her language. At length, having learned the language of the
Pelasgians, it was said that the dove had spoken. On that foundation
grew the tradition that the oaks themselves uttered oracular
responses. Notwithstanding this plausible account of Herodotus, it is not
impossible that some equivocal expressions in the Hebrew and Arabian
languages may have given rise to the story. ‘Himan,’ in the one
language, signified ‘a priest;’ and ‘Heman,’ in the other, was the name
for ‘a pigeon.’ Possibly those who found the former word in the history
of ancient Greece, written in the dialect of the original Phœnician
settlers, did not understand it, and by their mistake, caused it to be
asserted that a dove had founded the 468 oracle of Dodona. Bochart tells us that the same word, in the Phœnician
tongue, signifies either ‘pigeons,’ or ‘women;’ but the Abbè Sallier has
gone still further, and has shown that, in the language of the ancient
inhabitants of Epirus, the same word had the two significations
mentioned by Bochart. This oracle afterwards grew famous for its responses, and the priests
used considerable ingenuity in the delivery of their answers. They
cautiously kept all who came to consult them at a distance from the dark
recess where the shrine was situated; and took care to deliver their
responses in a manner so ambiguous, as to make people believe whatever
they pleased. In this circumstance originates the variation in the
descriptions of the oracle which the ancients have left us. According to
some, it was the oaks that spoke; according to others, the beeches;
while a third account was that pigeons gave the answers; and, lastly, it
was said that the ringing of certain cauldrons there suspended, divulged
the will of heaven. Stephanus Byzantinus has left a curious account of
this contrivance of the cauldrons; he says that in that part of the
forest of Dodona, where the oracle stood, there were two pillars
erected, at a small distance from each other. On one there was placed a
brazen vessel, about the size of an ordinary cauldron: and on the other
a little boy, which was most probably a piece of mechanism, who held a
brazen whip with several thongs which hung loose, and were easily moved.
When the wind blew, the lashes struck against the vessel, and occasioned
a noise while the wind continued. It was from them, he says, that the
forest took the name of Dodona; ‘dodo,’ in the ancient language,
signifying ‘a cauldron.’ Strabo says that the responses were originally given by three
priestesses: and he gives the reason why two priests were afterwards
added to them. The Bœotians having been treacherously attacked by the
people of Thrace during a truce which they had made, went to consult the
oracle of Dodona; and the priestess answering them that if they would
act impiously their design would succeed to their wish, the envoys
suspected that this response had been suggested by the enemy, and burned
her in revenge; after which they vindicated their cruelty by saying that
if the priestess designed to deceive them, she well deserved her
punishment; and that if she spoke with truthfulness, they had only
followed the advice of the oracle. This argument not satisfying the
people of the district, the Bœotian envoys were seized; but as they
pleaded that it was unjust that two women already prejudiced against
them should be their judges, two priests were added to decide the
matter. These, in return for their being the occasion of putting them in
an office so honourable and lucrative, acquitted the Bœotians; whose
fellow countrymen were always in the habit from that time of addressing
the priests when they consulted the oracle. These priests were called by
the name of ‘Selli.’ 469 xiii. 719-747. FABLE VII. Polyphemus , one of the Cyclops, jealous
of Acis, who is in love with Galatea, kills the youth with a rock which
he hurls at him; on which, his blood is changed into a river which bears
his name. They make for the neighbouring land of the Phæacians, 68 planted
with beauteous fruit. After this, Epirus and Buthrotos, 69 ruled over
by the Phrygian prophet, and a fictitious Troy, are reached. Thence,
acquainted with the future, all which, Helenus, the son of Priam, in his
faithful instructions has forewarned them of, they enter Sicania. With
three points this projects into the sea. Of these, Pachynos is turned
towards the showery South: Lilybæum is exposed to the soft Zephyrs: but
Peloros looks towards the Bear, free from the sea, and towards Boreas.
By this part the Trojans enter; and with oars and favouring tide,
at nightfall the fleet makes the Zanclæan sands. Scylla infests the
right hand side, the restless Charybdis the left. This swallows and
vomits forth again ships taken down; the other, having the face of a
maiden, has her swarthy stomach surrounded with fierce dogs; and (if the
poets have not left the whole a fiction) once on a time, too, she
was a maiden. Many suitors courted her; who being repulsed, she,
most beloved by the Nymphs of the ocean, went to the ocean Nymphs, and
used to relate the eluded loves of the youths. While Galatea 70 was giving her hair be to combed, heaving sighs,
she addressed her in such words as these: “ And yet,
O maiden, no ungentle race of men does woo thee; and as thou dost,
thou art able to deny them with impunity. But I, whose sire is Nereus,
whom the azure Doris bore, who am guarded, too, by a crowd of sisters,
was not able, but through the waves, to escape the passion of the
Cyclop;” and as she spoke, the tears choked her utterance. When, with
her fingers like marble, the maiden had wiped these away, and had
comforted 470 xiii. 747-782. the Goddess, “Tell me, dearest,” said she, “and conceal not from
me ( for I am true to thee) the cause of thy grief.” In these
words did the Nereid reply to the daughter of Cratæis: 71 “Acis was
the son of Faunus and of the Nymph Symæthis, a great delight,
indeed, to his father and his mother, yet a still greater to me. For the
charming youth had attached me to himself alone, and eight
birth-days having a second time been passed, he had now marked
his tender cheeks with the dubious down. Him I pursued ;
incessantly did the Cyclop me pursue. Nor can I, shouldst thou enquire,
declare whether the hatred of the Cyclop , or the love of Acis, was the stronger
in me. They were equal. O genial Venus! how great is the power of
thy sway. For that savage, and one to be dreaded by the very woods, and
beheld with impunity by no stranger, the contemner of great Olympus with
the Gods themselves , now feels what love is; and,
captivated with passion for me, he burns, forgetting his cattle and his
caves. “And now, Polyphemus, thou hast a care for thy looks, and now for the art of pleasing; now thou combest out thy stiffened hair with
rakes, and now it pleases thee to cut thy shaggy beard with the
sickle, and to look at thy fierce features in the water, and so to compose them. Thy love for carnage, and thy fierceness, and thy
insatiate thirst for blood, now cease; and the ships both come
and go in safety. Telemus, in the mean time arriving at the Sicilian
Ætna, Telemus, the son of Eurymus, whom no omen had ever deceived, accosts the dreadful Polyphemus, and says, ‘The single eye
that thou dost carry in the midst of thy forehead, Ulysses shall take
away from thee.’ He laughed, and said, ‘O most silly of the prophets,
thou art mistaken, for another has already taken it away.’ Thus
does he slight him, in vain warning him of the truth; and he either
burdens the shore, stalking along with huge strides, or, wearied, he
returns to his shaded cave. “A hill, in form of a wedge, runs out with a long projection into the
sea: and the waves of the ocean flow round either side. Hither
the fierce Cyclop ascended, and sat down in the middle. His woolly
flocks followed, there being no one to guide them. After the pine
tree, 72 which afforded him the 471 xiii. 782-816. service of a staff, but more fitted for sail-yards, was laid
before his feet, and his pipe was taken up, formed of a hundred reeds;
all the mountains were sensible of the piping of the shepherd: the
waves, too , were sensible. I, lying hid within a rock, and
reclining on the bosom of my own Acis, from afar caught such words as
these with my ears, and marked them so heard in my mind: ‘O
Galatea, fairer than 73 the leaf of the snow-white privet, 74 more
blooming than the meadows, more slender than the tall alder, brighter
than glass, more wanton than the tender kid, smoother than the shells
worn by continual floods, more pleasing than the winter’s sun, or than the summer’s shade, more beauteous than the apples, more sightly
than the lofty plane tree, clearer than ice, sweeter than the ripened
grape, softer than both the down of the swan, and than curdled milk,
and, didst thou not fly me, more beauteous than a watered garden. And
yet thou, the same Galatea, art wilder than the untamed
bullocks, harder than the aged oak, more unstable than the waters,
tougher than both the twigs of osier and than the white vines, more
immoveable than these rocks, more violent than the torrent, prouder than
the bepraised peacock, fiercer than the fire, rougher than the thistles,
more cruel than the pregnant she-bear, more deaf than the ocean waves,
more savage than the trodden water-snake: and, what I could especially
wish to deprive thee of, fleeter not only than the deer when pursued by
the loud barkings, but even than the winds and the fleeting air. “‘ But didst thou but know me well, thou wouldst repine at having fled, and thou
thyself wouldst blame thy own hesitation, and wouldst strive to retain
me. I have a part of the mountain for my cave, pendent with the
native rock; in which the sun is not felt in the middle of the heat, nor
is the winter felt: there are apples that load the boughs; there are
grapes on the lengthening vines, resembling gold; and there are purple
ones as well ; both the one and the other do I reserve for thee.
With thine own hands thou shalt thyself gather the soft strawberries
growing beneath the woodland 472 xiii. 816-851. shade; thou thyself shalt pluck the cornels of autumn, and plums
not only darkened with their black juice, but even of the choicest
kinds, and resembling new wax. Nor, I being thy husband, will there
be wanting to thee chesnuts, nor the fruit of the arbute tree: 75 every
tree shall be at thy service. All this cattle is my own: many, too, are
wandering in the valleys: many the wood conceals: many more are
penned in my caves. Nor, shouldst thou ask me perchance, could I tell
thee, how many there are; ’tis for the poor man to count his cattle. For
the praises of these trust not me at all; in person thou thyself mayst
see how they can hardly support with their legs their distended udders.
Lambs, too, a smaller breed, are in the warm folds: there are kids,
too, of equal age to them in other folds. Snow-white milk I
always have: a part of it is kept for drinking, another part
the liquified rennet hardens. Nor will common delights, and ordinary
enjoyments alone fall to thy lot, such as does, and hares, and
she-goats, or a pair of doves, or a nest taken from the tree top.
I have found on the mountain summit the twin cubs of a shaggy
she-bear, which can play with thee, so like each other that thou couldst
scarce distinguish them. These I found, and I said, ‘These for my
mistress will I keep.’ “‘Do now but raise thy beauteous head from out of the azure sea; now,
Galatea, come, and do not scorn my presents. Surely I know myself, and
myself but lately I beheld in the reflection of the limpid water; and my
figure 76 pleased me as I saw it. See how huge I am. Not Jove,
in heaven, is greater than this body; for thou art wont to tell how one
Jupiter reigns, who he is I know not. Plenty of hair hangs over my
grisly features, and, like a grove, overshadows my shoulders; nor think
it uncomely that my body is rough, thick set with stiff bristles.
A tree without leaves is unseemly; a horse is unseemly, unless
a mane covers his tawny neck. Feathers cover the birds; their wool is an
ornament to the sheep; a beard and rough hair upon their body is
becoming to men. I have but one eye in the middle of my forehead,
but it is like 473 xiii. 852-890. a large buckler. Well! and does not the Sun from the heavens behold
all these things? and yet the Sun has but one eye. And, besides, in your
seas does my father reign. Him do I offer thee for a father-in-law; only
do take pity on a suppliant, and hear his prayer, for to thee alone do I
give way. And I, who despise Jove, and the heavens, and the piercing
lightnings, dread thee, daughter of Nereus; than the lightnings is thy
wrath more dreadful to me. But I should be more patient under these
slights, if thou didst avoid all men. For why, rejecting the Cyclop,
dost thou love Acis? And why prefer Acis to my embraces? Yet, let him
please himself, and let him please thee, too, Galatea, though I
wish he could not; if only the opportunity is given, he shall find that
I have strength proportioned to a body so vast. I will pull out his
palpitating entrails; and I will scatter his torn limbs about the
fields, and throughout thy waves, and thus let him be united to
thee. For I burn: and my passion, thus slighted, rages with the
greater fury; and I seem to be carrying in my breast Ætna, transferred
there with all its flames; and yet, Galatea, thou art
unmoved.’ “Having in vain uttered such complaints (for all this I saw), he
rises; and like an enraged bull, when the heifer is taken away from him,
he could not stand still, and he wandered in the wood, and the well
known forests. When the savage monster espied me, and Acis
unsuspecting and apprehensive of no such thing; and he exclaimed:—
‘I see you, and I shall cause this to be the last union for your
affection.’ And that voice was as loud as an enraged Cyclop ought, for his size , to have. Ætna trembled at the noise; but I, struck
with horror, plunged into the adjoining sea. The hero, son of Symæthis,
turned his back and fled, and cried,— ‘Help me, Galatea,
I entreat thee; help me, ye parents of hers ; and admit me, now on the point of destruction, within your realms.’ The Cyclop
pursued, and hurled a fragment, torn from the mountain; and though the
extreme angle only of the rock reached him, yet it entirely crushed
Acis. But I did the only thing that was allowed by the Fates to be done,
that Acis might assume the properties of his grandsire. The purple blood
flowed from beneath the rock, and in a little time the redness began to
vanish; and at first it became the colour of a stream muddied by a
shower; and, in time, it became clear. Then the rock, that had been
thrown, opened, 474 xiii. 890-897. and through the chinks, a reed vigorous and stately arose, and the
hollow mouth of the rock resounded with the waters gushing forth. And,
wondrous event! a youth suddenly emerged, as far as the midriff,
having his new-made horns encircled with twining reeds. And he, but that
he was of larger stature, and azure in all his features, was Acis still . But, even then, still it was Acis, changed into a river;
and the stream has since retained that ancient name .” EXPLANATION. Homer, who, in the ninth Book of the Odyssey, has entered fully into the
subject of Polyphemus and the other Cyclops, does not recount this
adventure, which Ovid has borrowed from Theocritus, the Sicilian poet.
Some writers have suggested that Acis was a Sicilian youth, who, having
met with a repulse from Galatea, threw himself into the river, which was
afterwards called by his name. It is, however, more probable that this
river was so called from the rapidity of its course. Indeed, the
scholiast on Theocritus and Eustathius distinctly say that the stream
was called Acis, because the swiftness of its course resembled that of
an arrow, which was called ἀκὶς , in the Greek language. Homer, in describing the Cyclops, informs us that they were a lawless
race, who, neglecting husbandry, lived on the spontaneous produce of a
rich soil, and dwelling in mountain caves, devoted themselves entirely
to the pleasures of a pastoral life. He says that they were men of
monstrous stature, and had but one eye, in the middle of their forehead.
Thucydides supposes them to have been the original inhabitants of
Sicily. As their origin was unknown, it was said that they were the
offspring of Neptune, or, in other words, that they had come by sea, to
settle in Sicily. According to Justin, they retained possession of the
island till the time of Cocalus; but in that point he disagrees with
Homer, who represents them as being in the island after the time of
Cocalus, who was a contemporary of Minos, and lived long before the
Trojan war. They inhabited the western parts of Sicily, near the promontories of
Lilybæum and Drepanum; and from that circumstance, according to Bochart,
they received their name. He supposes that the Cyclopes were so called
from the Phœnician compound word Chek-lub, contracted for Chek-le-lub,
which, according to him, was the name of the Gulf of Lilybæum. Because,
in the Greek language κυκλὸς signified ‘a circle,’ and ὤπς , ‘an eye,’ it was given out that the name of
Cyclops was given to them, because they had but one round eye in the
middle of the forehead. It is possible that they may have acquired their
character of being cannibals on true grounds, or, perhaps, only because
they were noted for their extreme cruelty. Living near the volcanic
mountain of Ætna, they were called the workmen of Vulcan; and Virgil
describes them as forging the thunderbolts of Jupiter. Some writers
represent them as having armed the three Deities, who divided the empire
of the world: Jupiter with thunder; Pluto with his helmet; and Neptune
with his trident. Statius represents them as the builders of the walls
of Argos and Virgil as the 475 xiii. 898-917. founders of the gates of the Elysian fields. Aristotle supposes that
they were the first builders of towers. Diodorus Siculus and Tzetzes say that Polyphemus was king of a part of
Sicily, when Ulysses landed there; who, falling in love with Elpe, the
daughter of the king, carried her off . The Læstrygons, the neighbours of Polyphemus, pursued
him, and obliged him to give up the damsel, who was brought back to her
father. Ulysses, in relating the story to the Phæacians, artfully
concealed circumstances so little to his credit, and with impunity
invented the absurdities which he related concerning a country to which
his audience were utter strangers. FABLE VIII. Glaucus having observed some fishes
which he has laid upon the grass revive and leap again into the water,
is desirous to try the influence of the grass on himself. Putting some
of it into his mouth, he immediately becomes mad, and leaping into the
sea, is transformed into a sea God. Galatea ceases 77 speaking, and the company breaking up, they
depart; and the Nereids swim in the becalmed waves. Scylla returns,
(for, in truth, she does not trust herself in the midst of the ocean)
and either wanders about without garments on the thirsty sand, or, when
she is tired, having lighted upon some lonely recess of the sea, cools
her limbs in the enclosed waves. When , lo! cleaving the deep,
Glaucus comes, a new-made inhabitant of the deep sea, his limbs
having been lately transformed at Anthedon, 78 near Eubœa; and he
lingers from passion for the maiden now seen, and utters whatever
words he thinks may detain her as she flies. Yet still she flies, and,
swift through fear, she arrives at the top of a mountain, situate near
the shore. In front of the sea, there is a huge ridge, terminating in one
summit, bending for a long distance over the waves, and without
trees. Here she stands, and secured by the place, ignorant whether he is
a monster or a God, she both admires his colour, and his flowing hair
that covers his shoulders and his back, and how a wreathed fish closes
the extremity of his groin. This he perceives; and leaning upon a
rock that stands hard by, he says, “Maiden, I am no monster, no
savage 476 xiii. 917-956. beast; I am a God of the waters: nor have Proteus, and Triton, and
Palæmon, the son of Athamas, a more uncontrolled reign over the
deep. Yet formerly I was a mortal; but, still, devoted to the deep sea,
even then was I employed in it. For, at one time, I used to drag
the nets that swept up the fish; at another time, seated on a rock,
I managed the line with the rod. The shore was adjacent to a
verdant meadow, one part of which was surrounded with water, the other
with grass, which, neither the horned heifers had hurt with their
browsing, nor had you, ye harmless sheep, nor you , ye shaggy
goats, ever cropped it. No industrious bee took thence the
collected blossoms, no festive garlands were gathered thence for the
head; and no mower’s hands had ever cut it. I was the first to be
seated on that turf, while I was drying the dripping nets. And that I
might count in their order the fish that I had taken; I laid out
those upon it which either chance had driven to my nets, or their own
credulity to my barbed hooks. “The thing is like a fiction (but of what use is it to me to coin
fictions?); on touching the grass my prey began to move, and to shift
their sides, and to skip about on the land, as though in the sea. And
while I both paused and wondered, the whole batch flew off to the waves,
and left behind their new master and the shore. I was amazed, and,
in doubt for a long time, I considered what could be the cause;
whether some Divinity had done this, or whether the juice of some herb. ‘And yet,’ said I, ‘what herb has these properties?’ and with my
hand I plucked the grass, and I chewed it, so plucked, with my
teeth. Hardly had my throat well swallowed the unknown juices, when I
suddenly felt my entrails inwardly throb, and my mind taken possession
of by the passions of another nature. Nor could I stay in that place; and I exclaimed, ‘Farewell, land, never more to be revisited;’
and plunged my body beneath the deep. The Gods of the sea vouchsafed me,
on being received by them, kindred honours, and they entreated Oceanus
and Tethys to take away from me whatever mortality I bore. By them was I
purified; and a charm being repeated over me nine times, that washes
away all guilt, I was commanded to put my breast beneath a
hundred streams. “There was no delay; rivers issuing from different springs, and whole
seas, were poured over my head. Thus far I can 477 xiii. 956-968. relate to thee what happened worthy to be related, and thus far do I
remember; but my understanding was not conscious of the rest. When it
returned to me , I found myself different throughout all my
body from what I was before, and not the same in mind. Then, for the
first time, did I behold this beard, green with its deep colour, and my
flowing hair, which I sweep along the spacious seas, and my huge
shoulders, and my azurecoloured arms, and the extremities of my legs
tapering in the form of a finny fish. But still, what does this
form avail me, what to have pleased the ocean Deities, and what
to be a God, if thou art not moved by these things?” As he was saying such things as these, and about to say still more,
Scylla left the God. He was enraged, and, provoked at the repulse, he
repaired to the marvellous court of Circe, the daughter of Titan. EXPLANATION. The ancient writers mention three persons of the name of Glaucus: one
was the son of Minos, the second of Hippolochus, and the third is the
one here mentioned. Strabo calls him the son of Polybus, while other
writers make him to have been the son of Phorbas, and others of Neptune.
Being drowned, perhaps by accident, to do honour to his memory, it was
promulgated that he had become a sea God, and the city of Anthedon, of
which he was a native, worshipped him as such. Athenæus says that he carried off Ariadne from the isle of Naxos, where
Theseus had left her; on which Bacchus punished him by binding him to a
vine. According to Diodorus Siculus, he appeared to the Argonauts, when
overtaken by a storm. From Apollonius Rhodius we learn that he foretold
to them that Hercules, and Castor and Pollux, would be received into the
number of the Gods. It was also said, that in the battle which took
place between Jason and the Tyrrhenians, he was the only person that
escaped unwounded. Euripides, who is followed by Pausanias, says that he
was the interpreter of Nereus, and was skilled in prophecy; and Nicander
even says that it was from him that Apollo learned the art of
prediction. Strabo and Philostratus say that he was metamorphosed into a
Triton, which is a-kin to the description of his appearance here given
by Ovid. The place where he leaped into the sea was long remembered; and in the
days of Pausanias ‘Glaucus’ Leap’ was still pointed out by the people of
Anthedon. It is not improbable that he drowned himself for some reason
which tradition failed to hand down to posterity. 1. We are pleading. ]—Ver. 5. The skill of the Poet is
perceptible in the abrupt commencement of the speech of the impetuous
Ajax. 2. Nor his. ]—Ver. 11. Ajax often uses the pronoun ‘iste’ as a
term of reproach. 3. Night alone. ]—Ver. 15. By this he means that the alleged
exploits of Ulysses were altogether fictitious; or that they were done
in the dark to conceal his fear. 4. Took the city. ]—Ver. 23. Telamon, was the companion of
Hercules when he sacked Troy, as a punishment for the perfidy of
Laomedon. 5. Sisyphus. ]—Ver. 26. This is intended as a reproachful hint
against Ulysses, whose mother, Anticlea, was said to have been seduced
by Sisyphus before her marriage to Laërtes. 6. Ajax is the third. ]—Ver. 28. That is the third, exclusive
of Jupiter; for Ajax was the grandson of Æacus, and the great grandson
of Jupiter. 7. My cousin. ]—Ver. 31. ‘Frater’ here means, not ‘brother,’
but ‘cousin,’ as Peleus and Telamon, the fathers of Achilles and Ajax,
were brothers. 8. No informer. ]—Ver. 34. He alludes to the means which
Ulysses adopted to avoid going to the Trojan war. Pretending to be
seized with madness, he ploughed the sea-shore, and sowed it with salt.
To ascertain the truth, Palamedes placed his infant son, Telemachus,
before the plough; on which Ulysses turned on one side, to avoid hurting
the child, which was considered a proof that his madness was not
real. 9. Son of Nauplius. ]—Ver. 39. Palamedes was the son of
Nauplius, the king of Eubœa, and a son of Neptune. 10. The contrivance. ]—Ver. 38. Ulysses forged a letter from
Priam, in which the king thanked Palamedes for his intended assistance
to the Trojan cause, and begged to present him a sum of money. By
bribing the servants of Palamedes, he caused a large quantity of gold to
be buried in the ground, under his tent. He then caused the letter to be
intercepted, and to be carried to Agamemnon. On the appearance of
Palamedes to answer the charge, Ulysses appeared seemingly as his
friend, and suggested, that if no gold should be found in his
possession, he must be innocent. The gold, however, being found,
Palamedes was stoned to death. 11. Son of Pœas. ]—Ver. 45. Philoctetes was the possessor of the
arrows of Hercules, without the presence of which Troy could not be
taken. Accompanying the Greeks to the Trojan war, he was wounded in the
foot by one of the arrows; and the smell arising from the wound was so
offensive, that, by the advice of Ulysses, he was left behind, in the
island of Lemnos, one of the Cyclades. 12. Is being clothed. ]—Ver. 53. The Poet Attius, as quoted by
Cicero, says that Philoctetes, while in Lemnos, made himself clothing
out of the feathers of birds. 13. Or by death. ]—Ver. 61. Exile in the case of Philoctetes;
death, in that of Palamedes. 14. Forsaking of Nestor. ]—Ver. 64. Nestor having been wounded
by Paris, and being overtaken by Hector, was on the point of perishing,
when Diomedes came to his rescue, Ulysses having taken to flight. See
the Iliad, Book iii. 15. And upbraided. ]—Ver. 69. He alludes to the words in the
Iliad, which Homer puts in the mouth of Diomedes. 16. And covered him. ]—Ver. 75. Ajax, at the request of
Menelaüs, protected Ulysses with his shield, when he was wounded. 17. Fall to my lot. ]—Ver. 85. He alludes to the occasion when
some of the bravest of the Greeks drew lots which should accept the
challenge of Hector: the Greeks wishing, according to Homer, that the
lot might fall to Ajax Telamon, Ajax Oïleus, or Agamemnon. 18. Rhesus. ]—Ver. 98. He was slain by Ulysses and Diomedes on
the night on which he arrived, Iliad, Book x. 19. Dolon. ]—Ver. 98. Being sent out by Hector to spy, he was
intercepted by Ulysses and Diomedes, and slain at Troy. Iliad, Book
x. 20. Helenus. ]—Ver. 99. Being skilled in prophesy, after he was
taken prisoner by Diomedes and Ulysses, his life was saved; and marrying
Andromache, after the death of Pyrrhus, he succeeded to the throne of
part of the kingdom of Chaonia. 21. Dulichian. ]—Ver. 107. Dulichium was an island of the Ionian
Sea, near Ithaca, and part of the realms of Ulysses. 22. The spear. ]—Ver. 109. The spear of Achilles had been cut
from the wood on Mount Pelion, and given by the Centaur Chiron to his
father Peleus. 23. He through whom. ]—Ver. 134. Through whom Achilles had been
discovered, concealed among the daughters of Lycomedes, king of
Seyros. 24. Ever condemned. ]—Ver. 145. He alludes to the joint crime of
Peleus the uncle, and Telamon, the father of Ajax, who were banished for
the murder of their brother Phocus. 25. Through the mother. ]—Ver. 146. Anticlea, the mother of
Ulysses, was the daughter of Autolycus, of whom Mercury was the father
by Chione, the daughter of Dædalion . 26. Phthia. ]—Ver. 156. Phthia was the city of Thessaly, where
Peleus, the father of Achilles, was residing; while Pyrrhus, his son,
was living with his mother Deidamia, in the isle of Scyros, one of the
Cyclades. 27. Teucer. ]—Ver. 157. Teucer was the cousin of Achilles, being
the son of Telamon, and the half-brother of Ajax; Hesione being the
mother of Teucer, while Ajax was the son of Eubœa. 28. Chrysa. ]—Ver. 174. Chrysa and Cylla were cities in the
vicinity of Troy. This Scyros was, probably, not the island of that
name, but some place near Troy. 29. Lyrnessian. ]—Ver. 176. This was a city of the Troad, on the
taking of which by Achilles, Hippodamia, or Briseïs, the daughter of
Bryses, was made captive by Achilles. 30. Grief of one. ]—Ver. 181. He alludes to the misfortune of
Menelaüs in losing his wife, if, indeed, it could be deemed a
misfortune. 31. Antenor. ]—Ver. 201. Antenor, who was related to Priam,
always advocated peace with the Greeks; for which reason, according to
Livy, the Greeks did not treat him as an enemy. 32. Surround the trenches. ]—Ver. 212. He probably alludes to
the trenches thrown up before the ships of the Greeks, and defended by
embankments, which were afterwards destroyed by Neptune. 33. I am sent. ]—Ver. 215. As on the occasion when he was sent
to restore Chryseis to her father Chryses, the priest of Apollo, that
the pestilence might be stayed, which had been sent by the offended
God . 34. Thersites. ]—Ver. 233. He was the most deformed, cowardly,
and impudent of the Greeks, who, always abusing his betters, was beaten
by Ulysses, and was at last killed by Achilles with a blow of his
fist. 35. Compelled him. ]—Ver. 245. When he was taken prisoner by
them, Ulysses and Diomedes compelled Dolon to disclose what was going on
in the Trojan camp, and learned from him the recent arrival of Rhesus,
the son of either Mars or Strymon, and the king of Thrace. 36. Sarpedon. ]—Ver. 255. He was the son of Jupiter and Europa,
and was king of Lycia. Aiding the Trojans, he was slain by
Patroclus. 37. In their place. ]—Ver. 263. That is, inflicted on the
breast, and not on the back. 38. A single wound. ]—Ver. 267. He alludes to his being
invulnerable, from having been wrapped in the lion’s skin of
Hercules. 39. Dared to engage. ]—Ver. 275. Hector and Ajax Telamon meeting
in single combat, neither was the conqueror; but on parting they
exchanged gifts, which were fatal to them both. Hector was dragged round
the walls of Troy by the belt which he received from Ajax; while the
latter committed suicide with the sword which was given to him by
Hector. 40. Dardanian prophet. ]—Ver. 335. Helenus , the son of Priam. 41. The hidden statue. ]—Ver. 337. This was the Palladium, or
statue of Minerva, which was destined to be the guardian of the safety
of Troy, so long as it was in the possession of the Trojans. 42. By thy looks. ]—Ver. 350. We are to suppose, that here Ajax
is nodding at, or pointing towards Diomedes, as having helped Ulysses on
all the occasions which he names, he having been his constant companion
in his exploits. 43. Eurypilus. ]—Ver. 357. He was the son of Evæmon, and came
with forty ships to aid the Greeks. He was from Ormenius, a city of
Thessaly. 44. Andremon. ]—Ver. 357. Thoas, the son of Andremon, was the
leader of the Ætolians; he came with forty ships to the Trojan war. 45. Idomeneus. ]—Ver. 358. He was the son of Deucalion, king of
Crete. After the siege of Troy, he settled at Salentinum,
a promontory of Calabria, in Italy. 46. Meriones. ]—Ver. 359. He was the nephew and charioteer of
Idomeneus. 47. To the name. ]—Ver. 398. See note to Book x., line 207. 48. Country of Hypsipyle. ]—Ver. 399. The island of Lemnos is
here called the country of Hypsipyle, who saved the life of her father
Thoas, when the other women of the island slew the males. 49. A foreign air. ]—Ver. 406. Namely, Thrace, which was far
away from her native country. 50. Priestess of Apollo. ]—Ver. 410. Cassandra was the priestess
of Apollo. Being ravished by Ajax Oïleus, she became the captive of
Agamemnon, and was slain by Clytemnestra. 51. Astyanax. ]—Ver. 415. He was the only child of Hector and
Andromache. Ulysses threw him from the top of a high tower, that none of
the royal blood might survive. 52. Forsooth. ]—460. Clarke translates ‘scilicet,’ ‘I warrant
ye.’ 53. And children. ]—Ver. 509. Hyginus names fifty-four children
of Priam, of whom seventeen were by Hecuba. 54. She beheld. ]—Ver. 536. Euripides represents, in his tragedy
of Hecuba, that a female servant, sent by Hecuba to bring water from the
sea shore for the purpose of washing the body of Polyxena, was the first
to see the corpse of Polydorus. 55. Derives its name. ]—Ver. 569. Strabo places it near Sestos,
in the Thracian Chersonesus, and calls it κυνὸς σῆμα , ‘The bitches’ tomb.’ 56. Of their parent. ]—Ver. 619. He perhaps alludes to the
fights of the Gladiators, on the occasion of the funerals of the Roman
patricians. ‘Parentali perituræ Marte,’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘to fall
in the fight of parentation.’ 57. Antandros. ]—Ver. 628. This was a city of Phrygia, at the
foot of Mount Ida, where the fleet of Æneas was built. 58. Trees once grasped. ]—Ver. 635. These were a palm and an
olive tree, which were pointed out by the people of Delos, as having
been held by Latona, when in the pangs of labour. 59. Of slain oxen. ]—Ver. 637. This, however, was contrary to
the usual practice; for if we credit Macrobius, no victim was slain on
the altars of Apollo, in the island of Delos . 60. Of thy consort. ]—Ver. 673. It must be remembered, that he
is addressing Anchises, who was said to have enjoyed the favour of
Venus; to which Goddess the dove was consecrated. 61. In place of. ]—Ver. 686. For the seven gates, would at once
lead to the conclusion that it represented the city of Thebes, in
Bœotia. Myla, before referred to, was a town of Sicily. 62. Calls ‘Coronæ’. ]—Ver. 698. The word ‘Coronas’ is here
employed as the plural of a female name ‘Corona;’ in Greek Κώρωνις . 63. Of that place. ]—Ver. 707. Æneas and his followers founded
in Crete the city of Pergamea; but the pestilence which raged there, and
a continued drought, combined with the density of the atmosphere,
obliged them to leave the island. 64. The Strophades. ]—Ver. 709. These were two islands in the
Ionian Sea, on the western side of Peloponnesus. They received their
name from the Greek word στροφὴ , ‘a return,’ because Calais and Zethes pursued
the Harpies, which persecuted Phineus so far, and then returned home by
the command of Jupiter. 65. Same. ]—Ver. 711. This island was also called Cephalenia. It
was in the Ionian Sea, and formed part of the kingdom of Ulysses. 66. Ambracia. ]—Ver. 714. This was a famous city of Epirus,
which gave its name to the gulf of Ambracia. 67. Actian Apollo. ]—Ver. 715. Augustus built a temple to
Apollo, at Actium, in Epirus, near which he had defeated the fleet of
Antony and Cleopatra. He also instituted games, to be celebrated there
every fifth year in honour of his victory. 68. The Phæacians. ]—Ver. 719. The Phæacians were the people of
the Island of Corcyra (now Corfu), who were so called from Phæax, the
son of Neptune. This island was famous for the gardens of Alcinoüs,
which are mentioned in the Odyssey. The Corcyrans were the originators
of the disastrous Peloponnesian war. 69. Buthrotos. ]—Ver. 721. This was a city of Epirus, not far
from Corcyra. It received its name from its founder. 70. Galatea. ]—Ver. 738. She was a sea Nymph, the daughter of
Nereus and Doris. 71. Daughter of Cratæis. ]—Ver. 749. Cratæis was a river of
Calabria, in Italy. Symæthis was a stream of Sicily, opposite to
Calabria. 72. The pine tree. ]—Ver. 782. By way of corroborating this
assertion, Boccaccio tells us, that the body of Polyphemus was found in
Sicily, his left hand grasping a walking-stick longer than the mast of a
ship. 73. Fairer than. ]—Ver. 789. This song of Polyphemus is, in some
measure, imitated from that of the Cyclop, in the Eleventh Idyll of
Theocritus. 74. Snow-white privet. ]—Ver. 789. Hesiod says, that Galatea had
her name from her extreme fairness; γάλα being the Greek word for milk. To this the Poet here
alludes. 75. Arbute tree. ]—Ver. 820. The fruit of the arbutus, or
strawberry tree, were so extremely sour, that they were called, as Pliny
the Elder tells us, ‘unedones;’ because people could not eat more than
one. The tree itself was valued for the beauty and pleasing shade of its
foliage. 76. My figure. ]—Ver. 841. Virgil and Theocritus also represent
Polyphemus as boasting of his good looks. 77. Ceases. ]—Ver. 898. ‘Desierat Galatea loqui,’ is translated
by Clarke, ‘Galatea gave over talking.’ 78. Anthedon. ]—Ver. 905. Anthedon was a maritime city of
Bœotia, only separated from the Island of Eubœa, by the narrow strait of
the Euripus. 478 BOOK THE FOURTEENTH. FABLE I. Circe becomes enamoured of Glaucus, who
complains to her of his repulse by Scylla. She endeavours, without
success, to make him desert Scylla for herself. In revenge, she poisons
the fountain where the Nymph is wont to bathe, and communicates to her a
hideous form; which is so insupportable to Scylla, that she throws
herself into the sea, and is transformed into a rock. And now Glaucus , the Eubœan plougher of the swelling waves,
had left behind Ætna, placed upon the jaws of the Giant, and the fields
of the Cyclops, that had never experienced the harrow or the use of the
plough, and that were never indebted to the yoked oxen; he had left
Zancle, too, behind, and the opposite walls of Rhegium, 1 and the sea,
abundant cause of shipwreck, which, confined by the two shores, bounds
the Ausonian and the Sicilian lands. Thence, swimming with his huge
hands through the Etrurian seas, Glaucus arrived at the grass-clad
hills, and the halls of Circe, the daughter of the Sun, filled with
various wild beasts. Soon as he beheld her, after salutations were given
and received, he said, “Do thou, a Goddess, have compassion on me a
God; for thou alone (should I only seem deserving of it,) art able to
relieve this passion of mine . Daughter of Titan, by none is it
better known how great is the power of herbs, than by me, who have been
transformed by their agency; and, that the cause of my passion may not
be unknown to thee, Scylla has been beheld by me on the Italian shores,
opposite the Messenian walls. I am ashamed to recount my promises,
my entreaties, my caresses, and my rejected suit. But, do thou, if there
is any power in incantations, utter the incantation with thy holy lips; 479 xiv. 21-50. or, if any herb is more efficacious, make use of the proved
virtues of powerful herbs. But I do not request thee to cure me, and to
heal these wounds; and there is no necessity for an end to them;
but let her share in the flame.” But Circe, (for no one has a temper
more susceptible of such a passion, whether it is that the cause of it
originates in herself, or whether it is that Venus, offended 2 by her
father’s discovery, causes this,) utters such words as these:— “Thou wilt more successfully court her who is willing, and who
entertains similar desires, and who is captivated with an equal passion.
Thou art worthy of it, and assuredly thou oughtst to be courted
spontaneously; and, if thou givest any hopes, believe me, thou shalt be
courted 3 spontaneously. That thou mayst entertain no doubts, or
lest confidence in thy own beauty may not exist, behold! I who am
both a Goddess, and the daughter of the radiant Sun, and am so potent
with my charms, and so potent with my herbs, wish to be thine. Despise
her who despises thee; her, who is attached to thee, repay by like
attachment, and, by one act, take vengeance on two individuals.” Glaucus answered her, making such attempts as these,— “Sooner
shall foliage grow in the ocean, and sooner shall sea-weed spring
up on the tops of the mountains, than my affections shall change, while
Scylla is alive.” The Goddess is indignant; and since she is not able to
injure him, and as she loves him she does not wish to do so , she
is enraged against her, who has been preferred to herself; and, offended
with these crosses in love, she immediately bruises herbs, infamous for
their horrid juices, and, when bruised, she mingles with them the
incantations of Hecate. She puts on azure vestments too, and through the
troop of fawning wild beasts she issues from the midst of her hall; and
making for Rhegium, opposite to the rocks of Zancle, she enters the
waves boiling with the tides; on these, as though on the firm shore, she
impresses her footsteps, and with dry feet she skims along the surface
of the waves. 480 xiv. 51-74. There was a little bay, curving in the shape of a bent bow,
a favourite retreat of Scylla, whither she used to retire from the
influence both of the sea and of the weather, when the sun was at its
height in his mid career, and made the smallest shadow from the head downwards . This the Goddess infects beforehand, and pollutes it
with monster-breeding drugs; on it she sprinkles the juices distilled
from the noxious root, and thrice nine times, with her magic lips, she
mutters over the mysterious charm, enwrapt in the dubious
language of strange words. 4 Scylla comes; and she has now gone in up to the middle of her stomach, when she beholds her loins grow
hideous with barking monsters; and, at first believing that they are no
part of her own body, she flies from them and drives them off, and is in
dread of the annoying mouths of the dogs; but those that she flies from,
she carries along with herself ; and as she examines the substance
of her thighs, her legs, and her feet, she meets with Cerberean jaws in
place of those parts. The fury of the dogs still continues, and
the backs of savage monsters lying beneath her groin, cut short,
and her prominent stomach, still adhere to them. Glaucus, still in love, bewailed her , and fled from an
alliance with Circe, who had thus too hostilely employed the
potency of herbs. Scylla remained on that spot; and, at the first moment
that an opportunity was given, in her hatred of Circe, she deprived
Ulysses of his companions. Soon after, the same Scylla would have
overwhelmed the Trojan ships, had she not been first transformed into a
rock, which even now is prominent with its crags; this rock the
sailor, too, avoids. EXPLANATION. According to Hesiod, Circe was the daughter of the Sun and of the Nymph
Perse, and the sister of Pasiphaë, the wife of Minos. Homer makes her
the sister of Æetes, the king of Colchis, while other authors represent
her as the daughter of that monarch, and the sister of Medea. Being
acquainted with the properties of simples, and having used her art in
mixing poisonous draughts, she was generally looked upon as a sorceress.
Apollonius Rhodius says that she poisoned her husband, the king of the
Sarmatians, and that her father Apollo rescued her from the rage of her
subjects, by transporting her in his chariot into Italy. Virgil and Ovid
say that she inhabited one of the promontories of Italy, which
afterwards bore her name, and which at the present day is known by the
name of Monte Circello. 481 xiv. 75-76. It is not improbable that the person who went by the name of Circe was
never in Colchis or Thrace, and that she was styled the sister of Medea,
merely on account of the similarity of their characters; that they both
were called daughters of the Sun, because they understood the properties
of simples; and that their pretended enchantments were only a poetical
mode of describing the effect of their beauty, which drew many suitors
after them, who lost themselves in the dissipation of a voluptuous life.
Indeed, Strabo says, and very judiciously, as it would seem, that Homer
having heard persons mention the expedition of Jason to Colchis, and
hearing the stories of Medea and Circe, he took occasion to say, from
the resemblance of their characters, that they were sisters. According to some authors, Scylla was the daughter of Phorcys and
Hecate; but as other writers say, of Typhon. Homer describes her in the
following terms:— ‘She had a voice like that of a young whelp; no
man, not even a God, could behold her without horror. She had twelve
feet, six long necks, and at the end of each a monstrous head, whose
mouth was provided with a triple row of teeth.’ Another ancient writer
says, that these heads were those of an insect, a dog, a lion,
a whale, a Gorgon, and a human being. Virgil has in a great
measure followed the description given by Homer. Between Messina and
Reggio there is a narrow strait, where high crags project into the sea
on each side. The part on the Sicilian side was called Charybdis, and
that on the Italian shore was named Scylla. This spot has ever been
famous for its dangerous whirlpools, and the extreme difficulty of its
navigation. Several rapid currents meeting there, and the tide running
through the strait with great impetuosity, the sea sends forth a dismal
noise, not unlike that of the howling or barking of dogs, as Virgil has
expressed it, in the words, ‘Multis circum latrantibus undis.’ Palæphatus and Fusebius, not satisfied with the story being based on
such simple facts, assert that Scylla was a ship that belonged to
certain Etrurian pirates, who used to infest the coasts of Sicily, and
that it had the figure of a woman carved on its head, whose lower parts
were surrounded with dogs. According to these writers, Ulysses escaped
them; and then, using the privileges of a traveller, told the story to
the credulous Phæacians in the marvellous terms in which Homer has
related it. Bochart, however, says that the two names were derived from
the Phœnician language, in which ‘Scol,’ the root of Scylla, signified
‘a ruin,’ and Charybdis, ‘a gulf.’ FABLE II. Dido entertains Æneas in her palace,
and falls in love with him. He afterwards abandons her, on which she
stabs herself in despair. Jupiter transforms the Cercopes into apes; and
the islands which they inhabit are afterwards called ‘Pithecusæ,’ from
the Greek word signifying ‘an ape.’ After the Trojan ships, with their oars, had passed by her and the
ravening Charybdis; when now they had approached 482 xiv. 76-93. near the Ausonian shores, they were carried back by the winds 5 to the
Libyan coasts. The Sidonian Dido , she who was doomed not easily
to endure the loss of her Phrygian husband, received Æneas, both in her
home and her affection; on the pile, too, erected under the pretext of
sacred rites, she fell upon the sword; and, herself deceived, she
deceived all. Again, flying from the newly erected walls of the sandy
regions, and being carried back to the seat of Eryx and the attached
Acestes, he performs sacrifice, and pays honour 6 to the tomb of his father. He
now loosens from shore the ships which Iris, the minister of
Juno, has almost burned; and passes by the realms of the son of
Hippotas, and the regions that smoke with the heated sulphur, and leaves
behind him the rocks of the Sirens, 7 daughters of Acheloüs; and the
ship, deprived of its pilot, 8 coasts along Inarime 9 and Prochyta, 10 and Pithecusæ, situate on a barren hill, so called
from the name of its inhabitants. For the father of the Gods, once abhorring the frauds and perjuries
of the Cercopians, and the crimes of the fraudulent race, changed these
men into ugly animals; that these same 483 xiv. 93-100. beings might be able to appear unlike men, and yet like them. He both
contracted their limbs, and flattened their noses; bent back from their
foreheads; and he furrowed their faces with the wrinkles of old age. And
he sent them into this spot, with the whole of their bodies covered with
long yellow hair. Moreover, he first took away from them the use of
language, and of their tongues, made for dreadful perjury; he only
allowed them to be able to complain with a harsh jabbering. EXPLANATION. Although Ovid passes over the particulars of the visit of Æneas to Dido,
and only mentions her death incidentally, we may give a few words to a
story which has been rendered memorable by the beautiful poem of Virgil.
Elisa, or Dido, was the daughter of Belus, king of Tyre. According to
Justin, at his death he left his crown to his son Pygmalion jointly with
Dido, who was a woman of extraordinary beauty. She was afterwards
married to her uncle Sicharbas, who is called Sichæus by Virgil. Being
priest of Hercules, an office next in rank to that of king, he was
possessed of immense treasures, which the known avarice of Pygmalion
caused him to conceal in the earth. Pygmalion having caused him to be
assassinated, at which Dido first expressed great resentment, she
afterwards pretended a reconciliation, the better to cover the design
which she had formed to escape from the kingdom. Having secured the cooperation of several of the discontented Tyrians,
she requested permission to visit Tyre, and to leave her melancholy
retreat, where every thing contributed to increase her misery by
recalling the remembrance of her deceased husband. Hoping to seize her
treasures, Pygmalion granted her request. Putting her wealth on board
ship, she mixed some bags filled with sand among those that contained
gold, for the purpose of deceiving those whom the king had sent to
observe her and to escort her to Tyre. When out at sea, she threw the
bags overboard, to appease the spirit of her husband, as she pretended,
by sacrificing those treasures that had cost him his life. Then
addressing the officers that accompanied her, she assured them that they
would meet with but a bad reception from the king for having permitted
so much wealth to be wasted, and that it would be more advantageous for
them to fly from his resentment. The officers embarking in her design,
after they had taken on board some Tyrian nobles, who were privy to the
plan, she offered sacrifice to Hercules, and again set sail. Landing in
Cyprus, they carried off eighty young women, who were married to her
companions. On discovering her flight, Pygmalion at first intended to
pursue her; but the intreaties of his mother, and the remonstrances of
the priests, caused him to abandon his design. Having arrived on the coast of Africa, Dido bargained with the
inhabitants of the coast for as much ground as she could encompass with
a bull’s hide. This being granted, she cut the hide into as many thongs
as enclosed ground sufficient to build a fort upon; which was in
consequence called ‘ Byrsa.’ In making the foundation, an ox’s head was dug up, 484 xiv. 101-102. which being supposed to portend slavery to the city, if built there,
they removed to another spot, where, in digging, they found a horse’s
head, which was considered to be a more favourable omen. The story of
the citadel being named from the bull’s hide was very probably invented
by the Greeks; who, finding in the Phœnician narrative of the foundation
of Carthage, the citadel mentioned by the Tyrian name of ‘Bostra,’ which
had that signification, and fancying, from its resemblance to their word βυρσὰ , that it was derived
from it, invented the fable of the hide. Being pressed by Iarbas, king of Mauritania, to marry him, she asked for
three months to come to a determination. The time expiring, she ordered
a sacrifice to be made as an expiation to her husband’s shade, and
caused a pile to be erected, avowedly for the purpose of burning all
that belonged to him. Ascending it, she pretended to expedite the
sacrifice, and then despatched herself with a poniard. Virgil, wishing
to deduce the hatred of the Romans and Carthaginians from the very time
of Æneas, invented the story of the visit of Æneas to Dido; though he
was perhaps guilty of a great anachronism in so doing, as the taking of
Troy most probably preceded the foundation of Carthage by at least two
centuries. Ovid has also related her story at length in the third book
of the Fasti, and has followed Virgil’s account of the treacherous
conduct of Æneas, while he represents Iarbas as capturing her city after
her death, and driving her sister Anna into exile. In the Phœnician
language the word ‘Dido’ signified ‘the bold woman,’ and it is probable
that Elisa only received that name after her death. Bochart has taken
considerable pains to prove that she was the aunt of Jezebel, the
famous, or rather infamous, wife of King Ahab. The Poet then proceeds to say that Æneas saw the islands of the
Cercopians on his way, whom Jupiter had transformed into apes. Æschines
and Suidas say that there were two notorious robbers, inhabitants of an
island adjacent to Sicily, named Candulus and Atlas, who committed
outrages on all who approached the island. Being about to insult Jupiter
himself, he transformed them into apes, from which circumstance the
island received its name of Pithecusa. Sabinus says that they were
called Cercopes, because in their treachery they were like monkeys, who
fawn with their tails, when they design nothing but mischief. Zenobius
places the Cercopes in Libya; and says that they were changed into
rocks, for having offered to fight with Hercules. FABLE III. Apollo is enamoured of the Sibyl, and,
to engage her affection, offers her as many years as she can grasp
grains of sand. She forgets to ask that she may always continue in the
bloom of youth, and consequently becomes gray and decrepit. After he has passed by these, and has left the walls of Parthenope 11 on the right hand, on the left side he approaches 485 xiv. 102-128. the tomb of the tuneful son of Æolus 12 ; and he enters the shores of
Cumæ, regions abounding in the sedge of the swamp, and the cavern of the
long-lived Sibyl 13 , and entreats her , that through Avernus, he
may visit the shade of his father. But she raises her countenance,
a long time fixed on the ground; and at length, inspired by the
influence of the God, she says, “Thou dost request a great thing,
O hero, most renowned by thy achievements, whose right hand has
been proved by the sword, whose affection has been proved by the
flames. Yet, Trojan, lay aside all apprehension, thou shalt
obtain thy request; and under my guidance thou shalt visit the abodes of
Elysium, the most distant realms of the universe, and the beloved shade
of thy parent. To virtue, no path is inaccessible.” Thus she spoke, and she pointed out a branch refulgent with
gold, in the woods of the Juno of Avernus 14 , and commanded him
to pluck it from its stem. Æneas obeyed; and he beheld the power of the
dread Orcus, and his own ancestors, and the aged ghost of the
magnanimous Anchises; he learned, too, the ordinances of those regions, and what dangers would have to be undergone by him in his
future wars. Tracing back thence his weary steps along the path, he
beguiled his labour in discourse with his Cumæan guide. And while he was
pursuing his frightful journey along darkening shades, he said, “Whether
thou art a Goddess personally, or whether thou art but a woman most favoured by the Deities, to me shalt thou always be equal to a
Divinity; I will confess, too, that I exist through thy kindness,
who hast willed that I should visit the abodes of death, and that I
should escape those abodes of death when beheld by me . For
this kindness, when I have emerged into the breezes of the air,
I will erect a temple to thee, and I will give thee the
honours of frankincense.” 486 xiv 129-153. The prophetess looks upon him, and, with heaving sighs, she says,
“Neither am I a Goddess, nor do thou honour a human being with the
tribute of the holy frankincense. And, that thou mayst not err in
ignorance, life eternal and without end was offered me, had my virginity
but yielded to Phœbus, in love with me . But while he was hoping
for this, while he was desiring to bribe me beforehand with gifts, he
said: ‘Maiden of Cumæ, choose whatever thou mayst wish, thou shalt gain
thy wish.’ I, pointing to a heap of collected dust, inconsiderately
asked that as many birth-days might be my lot, as the dust contained
particles. It escaped me to desire as well, at the same time, years
vigorous with youth. But yet he offered me these, and eternal youth, had
I submitted to his desires. Having rejected the offers of Phœbus,
I remain unmarried. But now my more vigorous years have passed by,
and crazy old age approaches with its trembling step, and this must I
long endure. “For thou beholdest me, having now lived seven ages; it remains for
me to equal the number of particles of the dust; yet to behold
three hundred harvests, and three hundred vintages. The time will
come, when length of days will make me diminutive from a person so
large; and when my limbs, wasted by old age, will be reduced to the most
trifling weight. Then I shall not seem to have once been
beloved, nor once to have pleased a God. Even Phœbus himself
will, perhaps, not recognize me; or, perhaps , he will deny that
he loved me. To that degree shall I be said to be changed; and though
perceived by none, I shall still be recognized by my voice. My
voice the Destinies will leave me.” EXPLANATION. The early fathers of the church, and particularly Justin, in their works
in defence of Christianity, made use of the Sibylline verses of the
ancients. The Emperor Constantine, too, in his harangue before the
Nicene Council, quoted them, as redounding to the advantage of
Christianity; although he then stated that many persons did not believe
that the Sibyls were the authors of them. St. Augustin, too, employs
several of their alleged predictions to enforce the truths of the
Christian religion. Sebastian Castalio has warmly maintained the truth of the oracles
contained in these verses, though he admits that they have been very
much interpolated. Other writers, however, having carefully examined
them, have pronounced them to be spurious, and so many pious frauds;
which, perhaps, may be pronounced to be the general opinion at the
present day. We will, however, shortly enquire how many Sibyls of 487 antiquity there were, and when they lived; whether any of their works
were ever promulgated for the perusal of the public, and whether the
verses which still exist under their name have any ground to be
considered genuine. There is no doubt but that in ancient times there existed certain women,
who, led by a frenzied enthusiasm, uttered obscure sentences, which
passed for predictions with the credulous people who went to consult
them. Virgil and Ovid represent Æneas as going to the cave of the Cumæan
Sibyl, to learn from her the success of the wars he should be engaged
in. Plato, Strabo, Plutarch, Pliny, Solinus, and Pausanias, with many
other writers, have mentioned the Sibyls; and it would be absurd, with
Faustus Socinus, to affirm that no Sibyls ever existed. Indeed, Plato
and other authors of antiquity go so far as to say, that by their
productions they were essentially the benefactors of mankind. Some
mention but one Sibyl, who was born either at Babylon or at Erythræ, in
Phrygia. Diodorus Siculus mentions one only, and assigns Delphi as her
locality, calling her by the name of Daphne. Strabo and Stephanus
Byzantinus mention two, the one of Gergæ, a little town near Troy,
and the other of Mermessus, in the same country. Solinus reckons three;
the Delphian, named Herophile, the Erythræan, and the Cumæan. According
to Varro, their number amounted to ten, whose names, in the order of
time which Pausanias assigns them, were as follows: The first and the most ancient was the Delphian, who lived before the
Trojan war. The second was the Erythræan, who was said to have been the
first composer of acrostic verses, and who also lived before the Trojan
war. The third was the Cumæan, who was mentioned by Nævius in his book
on the first Punic war, and by Piso in his annals. She is the Sibyl
spoken of in the Æneid, and her name was Deïphobe. The fourth was the
Samian, called Pitho, though Eusebius calls her Herophile, and he makes
her to have lived about the time of Numa Pompilius. The fifth, whose
name was Amalthea, or Demophile, lived at Cumæ, in Asia Minor. The sixth
was the Hellespontine Sibyl, born at Mermessus, near Troy. The seventh
was the Libyan, mentioned by Euripides. Some suppose that she was the
first who had the name of Sibyl, which was given to her by the people of
Africa. The eighth was the Persian or Babylonian Sibyl, whom Suidas
names Sambetha. The ninth was the Phrygian, who delivered her oracles at
Ancyra, in Phrygia. The tenth was the Tiburtine, who was called Albunea,
and prophesied near Tibur, or Tivoli, on the banks of the Anio. In the
present story Ovid evidently intends to represent these various Sibyls
as being the same person; and to account for her prolonged existence, by
representing that Apollo had granted her a life to last for many
ages. Several ages before the Christian era, the Romans had a collection of
verses, which were commonly attributed to the Sibyls. These they often
consulted; and in the time of Tarquinius Superbus, two officers were
appointed for the purpose of keeping the Sibylline books, whose business
it was to look in them on the occasion of any public calamity, in order
to see whether it had been foretold and to make their report to the
Senate. The books were kept in a stone chest, beneath the temple of
Jupiter Capitolinus. These Duumvirs continued until the year of Rome
388, when eight others being added, they formed the College of the
Decemvirs. 488 About eighty-three years before the Christian era five other keepers of
these books were added, who thus formed the body called the
Quindecimvirs. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Aulus Gellius, Servius, and many other
writers, state the following as the origin of the Sibylline books. An
aged woman presented to Tarquinius Superbus three books that
contained the oracles of the Sibyls, and demanded a large sum for them.
The king refusing to buy them, she went and burned them; and returning,
asked the same price for the remaining six, as she had done for the
original number. Being again repulsed, she burnt three more, and coming
back again, demanded the original price for the three that remained.
Astonished at the circumstance, the king bought the books. Pliny and
Solinus vary the story a little, in saying that the woman at first
presented but three books, and that she destroyed two of them. It is generally supposed, that on the burning of the Capitol, about
eighty-three years before the Christian era, the Sibylline books of
Tarquinius Superbus were destroyed in the flames. To repair the loss,
the Romans despatched officers to various cities of Italy, and even to
Asia and Africa, to collect whatever they could find, under the name of
Sibylline oracles. P. Gabinius, M. Ottacilius, and L. Valerius brought
back a large collection, of which the greater part was rejected, and the
rest committed to the care of the Quindecimvirs. Augustus ordered a
second revision of them; and, after a severe scrutiny, those which were
deemed to be genuine, were deposited in a box, under a statue of Apollo
Palatinus. Tiberius again had them examined, and some portion of them
was then rejected. Finally, about the year A.D. 399, Stilcho, according to Rutilius Numatianus,
or rather, the Emperor Honorius himself, ordered them to be burnt. The so-called collection of Sibylline verses which now exists is
generally looked upon as spurious; or if any part is genuine, it bears
so small a proportion to the fictitious portion, that it has shared in
the condemnation. Indeed, their very distinctness stamps them as
forgeries; for they speak of the mysteries of Christianity in
undisguised language, and the names of our Saviour and the Virgin Mary
occur as openly as they do in the Holy Scriptures. It is a singular assertion of St. Jerome, that the gift of prophecy was
a reward to the Sibyls for their chastity. If such was the condition, we
have a right to consider that the Deities were very partial in the
distribution of their rewards, and in withholding them from the
multitudes who, we are bound in charity to believe, were as deserving as
the Sibyls themselves of the gift of vaticination. FABLE IV. Æneas arrives at Caieta, in Italy.
Achæmenides, an Ithacan, who is on board his ship, meets his former
companion Macareus there; and relates to him his escape from being
devoured by Polyphemus. Macareus afterwards tells him how Ulysses had
received winds from Æolus in a hide, and by that means had a prosperous
voyage; till, on the 489 xiv. 154-181. bag being opened by the sailors in their curiosity, the winds rushed
out, and raised a storm that drove them back to Æolia, and afterwards
upon the coast of the Læstrygons. While the Sibyl was relating such things as these, during the steep
ascent, the Trojan Æneas emerged from the Stygian abodes to the Eubœan
city, 15 and the sacrifice being performed, after the usual
manner, he approached the shores that not yet bore the name of his
nurse; 16 here, too, Macareus of Neritos, the companion of the
experienced Ulysses, had rested, after the prolonged weariness of his
toils. He recognized Achæmenides, once deserted in the midst of the
crags of Ætna; and astonished that, thus unexpectedly found again, he
was yet alive, he said, “What chance, or what God, Achæmenides,
preserves thee? why is a barbarian 17 vessel carrying thee ,
a Greek? What land is sought by thy bark?” No longer ragged in his clothing, but now his own master , 18 and wearing clothes tacked together with no thorns,
Achæmenides says, “Again may I behold Polyphemus, and those jaws
streaming with human blood, if my home and Ithaca be more delightful to
me than this bark; if I venerate Æneas any less than my own father. And,
though I were to do everything possible , I could never be
sufficiently grateful. ’Tis he that has caused that I speak, and
breathe, and behold the heavens and the luminary of the sun; and can I
be ungrateful, and forgetful of this? ’Tis through him that this
life of mine did not fall into the jaws of the Cyclop; and though I
were, even now, to leave the light of life, I should either be
buried in a tomb, or, at least, not in that paunch of his . What
were my feelings at that moment (unless, indeed, terror deprived me of
all sense and feeling), when, left behind, I saw you making for the
open sea? I wished to shout aloud, but I was fearful of betraying
myself to the enemy; the shouts of Ulysses were very nearly causing 19 the destruction of even your ship. I beheld 490 xiv. 181-211. him when, having torn up a mountain, he hurled the immense rock in the
midst of the waves; again I beheld him hurling huge stones, with his
giant arms, just as though impelled by the powers of the engine of war.
And, forgetful that I was not in it, I was now struck with horror
lest the waves or the stones might overwhelm the ship. “But when your flight had saved you from a cruel death, he, indeed,
roaring with rage, paced about all Ætna, and groped out the woods with
his hands, and, deprived of his eye, stumbled against the rocks; and
stretching out his arms, stained with gore, into the sea, he cursed the
Grecian race, and he said, ‘Oh! that any accident would bring back
Ulysses to me, or any one of his companions, against whom my anger might
find vent, whose entrails I might devour, whose living limbs I might
mangle with my right hand, whose blood might drench my throat, whose
crushed members might quiver beneath my teeth: how insignificant, or how
trifling, then , would be the loss of my sight, that has been
taken from me!’ This, and more, he said in his rage. Ghastly horror took
possession of me, as I beheld his features, streaming even yet with
blood, and the ruthless hands, and the round space deprived of the eye,
and his limbs, and his beard matted with human blood. Death was before
my eyes, and yet that was the least of my woes. I imagined
that 20 now he was about to seize hold of me, and that now
he was on the very point of swallowing my vitals within his own; in my
mind was fixed the impress of that time when I beheld two bodies of my
companions three or four times dashed against the ground. Throwing
himself on the top of them, just like a shaggy lion, he stowed away
their entrails, their flesh, their bones with the white marrow, and
their quivering limbs, in his ravenous paunch. A trembling seized
me; in my alarm I stood without blood in my features , as I beheld
him both chewing and belching out his bloody 491 xv . 211-247. banquet from his mouth, and vomiting pieces mingled with wine; and I fancied that such a doom was in readiness for
wretched me. “Concealing myself for many a day, and trembling at every sound, and
both fearing death and yet desirous to die, satisfying hunger
with acorns, and with grass mixed with leaves, alone, destitute,
desponding, abandoned to death and destruction, after a length of time,
I beheld a ship not far off; by signs I prayed for deliverance, and
I ran down to the shore; I prevailed; and a Trojan ship received
me, a Greek. Do thou too, dearest of my companions, relate thy
adventures, and those of thy chief, and of the company, which, together
with thee, entrusted themselves to the ocean.” The other relates how that Æolus rules over the Etrurian seas; Æolus,
the grandson of Hippotas, who confines the winds in their prison, which
the Dulichean chief had received, shut up in a leather bag ,
a wondrous gift; how, with a favouring breeze, he had proceeded for
nine days, and had beheld the land he was bound for; and how ,
when the first morning after the ninth had arrived, his companions,
influenced by envy and a desire for booty, supposing it to be gold, had
cut the fastenings of the winds; and how , through these, the ship
had gone back along the waves through which it had just come, and had
returned to the harbour of the Æolian king. “Thence,” said he, “we came to the ancient city 21 of Lamus, the
Læstrygon. Antiphates was reigning in that land. I was sent to him,
two in number accompanying me; and with difficulty was safety procured
by me and one companion, by flight; the third of us stained the accursed
jaws of the Læstrygon with his blood. Antiphates pursued us as we fled,
and called together his followers; they flocked together, and, without
intermission, they showered both stones and beams, and they overwhelmed
men, and ships, too, did they overwhelm; yet one, which carried us and
Ulysses himself, escaped. A part of our companions thus lost, grieving and lamenting much we arrived at those regions which thou
perceivest afar hence. Look! afar hence thou mayst perceive an island, 22 that has been seen by me; and do thou, most
righteous of the Trojans, thou son of a Goddess, 492 xiv. 247-253. (for, since the war is ended, thou art not, Æneas, to be called an
enemy) I warn thee—avoid the shores of Circe.” EXPLANATION. Æolus, according to Servius and Varro, was the son of Hippotas, and
about the time of the Trojan war reigned in those islands, which were
formerly called ‘Vulcaniæ,’ but were afterwards entitled ‘Æoliæ,’ and
are now known as the Lipari Islands. Homer mentions only one of these
islands, which were seven in number. He calls it by the name of Æolia,
and probably means the one which was called Lipara, and gave its name to
the group, and which is now known as Strombolo. Æolus seems to have been
a humane prince, who received with hospitality those who had the
misfortune to be cast on his island. Diodorus Siculus says that he was
especially careful to warn strangers of the shoals and dangerous places
in the neighbouring seas. Pliny adds, that he applied himself to the
study of the winds, by observing the direction of the smoke of the
volcanos, with which the isles abounded. Being considered as an authority on that subject, at a time when
navigation was so little reduced to an art, the poets readily feigned
that he was the master of the winds, and kept them pent up in caverns,
under his control. The story of the winds being entrusted to Ulysses,
which Ovid here copies from Homer, is merely a poetical method of
saying, that Ulysses disregarded the advice of Æolus, and staying out at
sea beyond the time he had been recommended, was caught in a violent
tempest. It is possible that Homer may allude to some custom which
prevailed among the ancients, similar to that of the Lapland witches in
modern times, who pretend to sell a favourable wind, enclosed in a bag,
to mariners. Homer speaks of the six sons and six daughters of Æolus;
perhaps they were the twelve principal winds, upon which he had expended
much pains in making accurate observations. Bochart suggests that the isle of Lipara was called by the Phœnicians
‘Nibara,’ on account of its volcano, (that word signifying ‘a torch,’)
which name was afterwards corrupted to Lipara. FABLE V. Achæmenides lands in the isle of Circe,
and is sent to her palace with some of his companions. Giving them a
favourable reception, she makes them drink of a certain liquor; and, on
her touching them with a wand, they are immediately transformed into
swine. Eurylochus, who has refused to drink, informs Ulysses, who
immediately repairs to the palace, and obliges Circe to restore to his
companions their former shape. “We, too, having fastened our ships to the shores of Circe,
remembering Antiphates and the cruel Cyclop, refused to go and enter her
unknown abode. By lot were we chosen; that lot sent both me and the
faithful Polytes, and Eurylochus, and 493 xiv. 253-283. Elpenor, too much addicted 23 to wine, and twice nine 24 companions, to the walls of Circe. Soon as we reached them, and stood at
the threshold of her abode; a thousand wolves, and bears and
lionesses mixed with the wolves, created fear through meeting them; but
not one of them needed to be feared, and not one was there to
make a wound on our bodies. They wagged their caressing tails in the
air, and fawning, they attended our footsteps , until the female servants
received us, and led us, through halls roofed with marble, to their
mistress. “She is sitting in a beautiful alcove, on her wonted throne, and clad
in a splendid robe; over it she is arrayed in a garment of gold tissue.
The Nereids and the Nymphs, together, who tease no fleeces with the
motion of their fingers nor draw out the ductile threads, are placing
the plants in due order, and arranging in baskets the flowers confusedly
scattered, and the shrubs variegated in their hues. She herself
prescribes the tasks that they perform; she herself is aware what is the
use of every leaf; what combined virtue there is in them when mixed; and
giving attention, she examines each herb as weighed. 25 When
she beheld us, having given and received a salutation, she gladdened her
countenance, and granted every thing to our wishes. And without delay,
she ordered the grains of parched barley to be mingled, and honey, and
the strength of wine, and curds with pressed milk. Secretly, she added
drugs to be concealed beneath this sweetness. We received the cups
presented by her sacred right hand. Soon as, in our thirst, we quaffed
them with parching mouth, and the ruthless Goddess, with her wand,
touched the extremity of our hair (I am both ashamed, and yet I will tell of it), I began to grow rough with bristles,
and no longer to be able to speak; and, instead of words, to utter a
harsh noise, and to grovel on the ground with all my face. I felt,
too, my mouth receive a hard skin, with its crooked snout, and my neck
swell with muscles; and with the member with which, the moment before, 494 xiv. 283-314. I had received the cup, with the same did I impress my
footsteps. “With the rest who had suffered the same treatment (so powerful are
enchanted potions) I was shut up in a pig-sty; and we perceived
that Eurylochus, alone, had not the form of a swine; he, alone, escaped
the proffered draught. And had he not escaped it, I should even, at
this moment, have still been one of the bristle-clad animals; nor would
Ulysses, having been informed by him of so direful a disaster, have come
to Circe as our avenger. The Cyllenian peace-bearer had given him
a white flower; the Gods above call it ‘Moly;’ 26 it is supported by
a black root. Protected by that, and at the same time by the instruction
of the inhabitants of heaven, he entered the dwelling of Circe, and
being invited to the treacherous draughts, he repelled her, while
endeavouring to stroke his hair with her wand, and prevented her, in her
terror, with his drawn sword. Upon that, her promise was given ,
and right hands were exchanged; and, being received into her couch, he
required the bodies of his companions as his marriage gift. “We are then sprinkled with the more favouring juices of
harmless plants, and are smitten on the head with a blow from her
inverted wand; and charms are repeated, the converse of the charms that
had been uttered. The longer she chaunts them, the more erect are we
raised from the ground; and the bristles fall off, and the fissure
leaves our cloven feet; our shoulders return; our arms become attached 27 to their upper parts. In tears, we embrace him also in tears; and we cling to the neck of our chief; nor do we
utter any words before those that testify that we are grateful. “The space of a year detained us there; and, as I was present for such a length of time, I saw many things; and many
things I heard with my ears. This, too, among many other things I heard , which one of the four handmaids appointed for such
rites, privately informed me of. For while Circe was passing her time
apart with my chief, she pointed out 495 xiv. 314-328. to me a youthful statue made of snow-white marble, carrying a woodpecker
on its head, erected in the hallowed temple, and bedecked with many a
chaplet. When I asked, and desired to know who he was, and why he was
venerated in the sacred temple, and why he carried that bird; she
said:— ‘Listen, Macareus, learn hence, too, what is the power of
my mistress, and give attention to what I say.’” EXPLANATION. Ulysses having stayed some time at the court of Circe, where all were
immersed in luxury and indolence, begins to reflect on the degraded
state to which he is reduced, and resolutely abandons so unworthy a mode
of life. This resolution is here typified by the herb moly, the symbol
of wisdom. His companions, changed into swine, are emblems of the
condition to which a life of sensuality reduces its votaries; while the
wolves, lions, and horses show that man in such a condition fails not to
exhibit the various bad propensities of the brute creation. Thus was the
prodigal son, mentioned in the New Testament, reduced to a level with
the brutes, ‘and fain would have filled his belly with the husks that
the swine did eat.’ It is not improbable that Circe was the original from which the Eastern
romancer depicted the enchantress queen Labè in the story of Beder and
Giauhare in the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments. They were both ladies of
light reputation, both fond of exercising their magical power on
strangers, and in exactly the same manner: and as Ulysses successfully
resisted the charms of Circe, so Beder thwarted the designs of Labè; but
here the parallel ends. FABLE VI. Circe , being enamoured of Picus, and
being unable to shake his constancy to his wife Canens, transforms him
into a woodpecker, and his retinue into various kinds of animals. Canens
pines away with grief at the loss of her husband, and the place where
she disappears afterwards bears her name. “‘Picus, the son of Saturn, was a king in the regions of Ausonia, an
admirer of horses useful in warfare. The form of this person was such as
thou beholdest. Thou thyself here mayst view his comeliness, and
thou mayst approve of his real form from this feigned resemblance of it.
His disposition was equal to his beauty; and not yet, in his age, could
he have beheld four times the Olympic contest celebrated each
fifth year in the Grecian Elis. He had attracted, by his good looks, the Dryads, born in the hills of Latium; the Naiads, the fountain
Deities, wooed him; Nymphs , which Albula, 28 and which the 496 xiv. 328-354. waters of Numicus, and which those of Anio, and Almo but very short 29 in its course, and the rapid Nar, 30 and
Farfarus, 31 with its delightful shades, produced, and those
which haunt the forest realms of the Scythian 32 Diana, and the
neighbouring streams. “‘Yet, slighting all these, he was attached to one Nymph, whom, on
the Palatine hill, Venilia is said once to have borne to the Ionian
Janus. 33 Soon as she was ripe with marriageable years, she
was presented to Laurentine Picus, preferred by her before all
others; wondrous, indeed, was she in her beauty, but more wondrous
still, through her skill in singing; thence she was called Canens. 34 She was wont, with her voice, to move the woods and
the rocks, and to tame the wild beasts, and to stop the course of the long rivers, and to detain the fleeting birds. While she was singing
her songs with her feminine voice, Picus had gone from his dwelling into
the Laurentine fields, to pierce the wild boars there bred; and he was
pressing the back of his spirited horse, and was carrying two javelins
in his left hand, having a purple cloak fastened with yellow gold. The
daughter of the Sun, too, had come into the same wood; and that she
might pluck fresh plants on the fruitful hills, she had left behind the
Circæan fields, so called after her own name. “‘Hidden by the shrubs, soon as she beheld the youth, she was
astounded; the plants which she had gathered fell from her bosom, and a
flame seemed to pervade her entire marrow. As soon as she regained her
presence of mind from so powerful a shock, she was about to
confess what she desired; the speed of his horse, and the surrounding
guards, caused that she 497 xiv. 354-389. could not approach. ‘And yet thou shalt not escape me ,’ she said, ‘even shouldst thou
be borne on the winds, if I only know myself, if all potency in herbs
has not vanished, and if my charms do not deceive me.’ Thus she
said; and she formed the phantom of a fictitious wild boar, with no
substance, and commanded it to run past the eyes of the king, and to
seem to go into a forest, thick set with trees, where the wood is most
dense, and where the spot is inaccessible to a horse. There is no delay;
Picus, forthwith, unconsciously follows the phantom of the prey; hastily
too, he leaves the reeking back of his steed, and, in pursuit of a vain
hope, wanders on foot in the lofty forest. She repeats prayers to
herself, and utters magical incantations, and adores strange Gods in
strange verses, with which she is wont both to darken the disk of the
snow-white moon, and to draw the clouds that suck up the moisture, over
the head of her father. Then does the sky become lowering at the
repeating of the incantation, and the ground exhales its vapours; and
his companions wander along the darkened paths, and his guards are
separated from the king. “‘She, having now gained a favourable place and opportunity,
says, ‘O, most beauteous youth ! by thy eyes, which have
captivated mine, and by this graceful person, which makes me, though a
Goddess, to be thy suppliant, favour my passion, and receive the Sun,
that beholds all things, as thy father-in-law, and do not in thy cruelty
despise Circe, the daughter of Titan.’ Thus she says. He roughly
repels her and her entreaties: and he says, ‘Whoever thou art, I am
not for thee; another female holds me enthralled, and for a long space
of time, I pray, may she so hold me. I will not pollute the
conjugal ties with the love of a stranger, while the Fates shall
preserve for me Canens, the daughter of Janus.’ The daughter of Titan,
having often repeated her entreaties in vain, says, ‘Thou shalt not
depart with impunity, nor shalt thou return to Canens; and by experience
shalt thou learn what one slighted, what one in love, what a woman, can
do; but that one in love, and slighted, and a woman, is Circe.’ “‘Then twice did she turn herself to the West, and twice to the East;
thrice did she touch the youth with her wand; three charms did she
repeat. He fled; wondering that he sped more swiftly than usual , he beheld wings on
his body; 498 xiv. 390-419. and indignant that he was added suddenly as a strange bird to the Latian
woods, he struck the wild oaks with his hard beak, and, in his anger,
inflicted wounds 35 on the long branches. His wings took the purple
colour of his robe. The piece of gold that had formed a buckle, and had
fastened his garment, became feathers, and his neck was encompassed with the colour of yellow gold; and nothing now remained to
Picus of his former self , beyond the name. “‘In the meantime his attendants, having, often in vain, called on
Picus throughout the fields, and, having found him in no direction, meet
with Circe, (for now she has cleared the air, and has allowed the clouds
to be dispersed by the woods and the sun); and they charge her with just
accusations, and demand back their king, and are using violence, and are
preparing to attack her with ruthless weapons. She scatters noxious
venom and poisonous extracts; and she summons together Night, and the
Gods of Night, from Erebus and from Chaos, and she invokes Hecate in
magic howlings. Wondrous to tell, the woods leap from their spot; the
ground utters groans, the neighbouring trees become pallid, the grass
becomes moist, besprinkled with drops of blood; the stones seem to send
forth harsh lowings, the dogs seem to bark, and the ground to
grow loathsome with black serpents, and unsubstantial ghosts of the
departed appear to flit about. The multitude trembles, astonished
at these prodigies; she touches their astonished faces, as they tremble,
with her enchanted wand. From the touch of this, the monstrous forms of
various wild beasts come upon the young men; his own form remains to no
one of them. “‘ The setting Sun
has now borne down upon the Tartessian shores; 36 and in vain
is her husband expected, both by the eyes and the longings of Canens.
Her servants and the people run about through all the woods, and carry
lights to 499 xiv. 419-440. meet him. Nor is it enough for the Nymph to weep, and to tear her hair,
and to beat her breast; though all this she does, she rushes forth, and,
in her distraction, she wanders through the Latian fields. Six nights,
and as many returning lights of the Sun, beheld her, destitute of sleep
and of food, going over hills and valleys, wherever chance led her.
Tiber, last of all , beheld her, worn out with weeping and
wandering, and reposing her body on his cold banks. There, with tears,
she poured forth words attuned, lamenting, in a low voice, her very
woes, as when the swan, now about to die, sings his own funereal
dirge. “‘At last, melting with grief, even to her thin marrow, she
pined away, and by degrees vanished into light air. Yet the Fame of it
became attached to the spot, which the ancient Muses have properly
called Canens, after the name of the Nymph.’ During that long year, many
such things as these were told me and were seen by me . Sluggish
and inactive through idleness, we were ordered again to embark on the
deep, again to set our sails. The daughter of Titan had said that
dangerous paths, and a protracted voyage, and the perils of the raging
sea were awaiting us. I was alarmed, I confess; and having
reached these shores, here I remained.” EXPLANATION. When names occur in the ancient Mythology, of Oriental origin, we may
conclude that they were imported into Greece and Italy from Egypt or
Phœnicia; and that their stories were derived from the same sources;
such as those of Adonis, Arethusa, Arachne, and Isis. Those that are
derived from the Greek languages are attached to fictions of purely
Greek origin, such as the fables of Daphne, Galantis, Cygnus, and the
Myrmidons; and where the names are of Latin original, we may conclude
that their stories originated in Italy: such, for instance, as those of
Canens, Picus, Anna Perenna, Flora, Quirinus, and others. To this rule there are certain exceptions; for both Greece and Italy
occasionally appropriated each other’s traditions, by substituting the
names of one language for those of the other. Thus it would not be safe
to affirm positively that the story of Portumnus and Matuta is of Latin
origin, since Greece lays an equal claim to it under the names of
Leucothoë and Palæmon, while, probably, Cadmus originally introduced it
from Phœnicia, under the names of Ino and Melicerta. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, on the authority of Cato the Censor and
Asellius Sempronius, says that the original inhabitants of Italy were a
Greek colony. Cato and Sempronius state that they were from Achaia,
while Dionysius says that they came from Arcadia, under the command 500 xiv. 441-456. of Œnotrius. Picus is generally supposed to have been one of the
aboriginal kings of Italy, who was afterwards Deified. Servius, in his
Commentary on the seventh Book of the Æneid, informs us that Picus
pretended to know future events, and made use of a woodpecker, which he
had tamed, for the purpose of his auguries. On this ground, after his
death, it was generally reported that he had been transformed into that
bird, and he was ranked among the Dii Indigetes of Latium. Dying in his
youth, his wife Canens retired to a solitary spot, where she ended her
life, and the intensity of her grief gave rise to the fable that she had
pined away into a sound. It has been suggested that the story took its rise from the oracles of
Mars among the Sabines, when a woodpecker was said to give the
responses. According to Bochart, it arose from the confusion of the
meaning of the Phœnician word ‘picea,’ which signified a ‘diviner.’ It
is the exuberant fancy of Ovid alone which connects Picus with the story
of Circe. FABLES VII. AND VIII. Turnus having demanded succour from
Diomedes against Æneas, the Grecian prince, fearing the resentment of
Venus, refuses to send him assistance; and relates how some of his
followers have been transformed by Venus into birds. An Apulian shepherd
surprising some Nymphs, insults them, on which he is changed into a wild
olive tree. Macareus had concluded. And the nurse of Æneas, now buried in
a marble urn, had this short inscription on her tomb:— “My
foster-child, of proved piety, here burned me, Caieta, preserved from
the Argive flames, with that fire which was my due.” The fastened cable
is loosened from the grassy bank, and they leave far behind the wiles
and the dwelling of the Goddess, of whom so ill a report has been given,
and seek the groves where the Tiber, darkened with the shade of
trees , breaks into the sea with his yellow sands. Æneas , too,
gains the house and the daughter of Latinus, the son of Faunus; 37 but not without warfare. A war is waged with a
fierce nation, and Turnus is indignant on account of the wife that had
been betrothed to him. 38 All Etruria meets in battle with
Latium, and long is doubtful victory struggled for with ardent arms.
Each side increases his strength with foreign forces, and many take the
part of the Rutulians, many that of the Trojan side. 501 xiv. 456-485. Nor had Æneas arrived in vain at the thresholds of
Evander, 39 but Venulus came in vain to the great city,
of the exiled Diomedes. He, indeed, had founded a very great city under
the Iapygian Daunus, and held the lands given to him in dower. But after Venulus had executed the commands of Turnus, and had asked
for aid, the Ætolian hero pleaded his resources as an excuse: that he
was not wishful to commit the subjects of his father-in-law to a war,
and that he had no men to arm of the nation of his own countrymen; “And
that ye may not think this a pretext, although my grief be renewed at
the bitter recollection, yet I will endure the recital of it .
After lofty Ilion was burnt, and Pergamus had fed the Grecian flames,
and the Narycian hero, 40 having ravished the virgin, distributed that
vengeance upon all, which he alone merited, on account of the virgin; we
were dispersed and driven by the winds over the hostile seas; we Greeks
had to endure lightning, darkness, rain, and the wrath both of the
heavens and of the sea, and Caphareus, the completion of our misery. And
not to detain you by relating these sad events in their order, Greece
might then have appeared even to Priam, worthy of a tear. Yet the care
of the armed universe preserved me, rescued from the waves. “But again was I driven from Argos, the land of my fathers;
and genial Venus exacted satisfaction in vengeance for her former wound:
and so great hardships did I endure on the deep ocean, so great amid
arms on shore, that many a time were they pronounced happy by me,
whom the storm, common to all , and Caphareus, swallowed up in the
threatening 41 waves; and I wished that I had been one of them. My
companions having now endured the utmost extremities, both in war and on
the ocean, lost courage, and demanded an end of their wanderings. But
Agmon, of impetuous temper, and 502 xiv. 485-513. then embittered as well by misfortunes, said, ‘What does there remain
now, ye men, for your patience to refuse to endure? What has Cytherea,
(supposing her to desire it), that she can do beyond this? For so long
as greater evils are dreaded, there is room for prayers; but where one’s
lot is the most wretched possible, fear is trampled under foot,
and the extremity of misfortune is free from apprehensions. Let Venus herself hear it, if she likes; let her hate, as she does hate , all the men under the rule of Diomedes. Yet all of us
despise her hate, and this our great power is bought by us at great
price.’ “With such expressions does the Pleuronian 42 Agmon provoke
Venus against her will, and revive her former anger. His words are
approved of by a few. We, the greater number of his friends, rebuke
Agmon: and as he is preparing to answer, his voice and the passage of
his voice together become diminished; his hair changes into feathers;
his neck newly formed, his breast and his back are covered with down;
his arms assume longer feathers; and his elbows curve out into light
wings. A great part of his foot receives toes; his mouth becomes
stiff and hardened with horn, and has its end in a point. Lycus and
Idas, and Nycteus, together with Rhetenor, and Abas, are all astounded at him; and while they are astounded, they assume a similar
form; and the greater portion of my company fly off, and resound around
the oars with the flapping of their wings. Shouldst thou inquire what
was the form of these birds so suddenly made; although it was not that
of swans, yet it was approaching to that of white swans. With
difficulty, for my part, do I, the son-in-law of the Iapygian Daunus,
possess these abodes and the parched fields with a very small remnant of
my companions.” Thus far the grandson of Œneus. Venulus leaves the Calydonian 43 realms and the Peucetian 44 bays, and the 503 xiv. 513-526. Messapian 45 fields. In these he beholds a cavern, which,
overshadowed by a dense grove, and trickling with a smooth stream, the
God Pan, the half goat, occupies; but once on a time the Nymphs
possessed it. An Apulian shepherd alarmed them, scared away from that
spot; and, at first, he terrified them with a sudden fear; afterwards,
when their presence of mind returned, and they despised him as he
followed, they formed dances, moving their feet to time. The shepherd
abused them; and imitating them with grotesque capers, he added rustic
abuse in filthy language. Nor was he silent, before the growing tree closed his throat. But from this tree and its sap you may
understand what were his manners. For the wild olive, by its
bitter berries, indicates the infamy of his tongue; the coarseness of
his words passed into them. EXPLANATION. Latinus having been told by an oracle that a foreign prince should come
into his country and marry his daughter Lavinia, received Æneas
hospitably, and formed an alliance with him, promising him his daughter
in marriage; on which Turnus, who was the nephew of Amata, his wife, and
to whom Lavinia was betrothed, declared war against Æneas. The ancient historians tell us, that, on returning from the siege of
Troy, Diomedes found that his throne had been usurped by Cyllabarus, who
had married his wife Ægiale. Not having sufficient forces to dispossess
the intruder, he sought a retreat in Italy, where he built the city of
Argyripa, or Argos Hippium. Diomedes having married the daughter of
Daunus, quarrelled with his father-in-law, and was killed in fight; on
which his companions fled to an adjacent island, which, from his name,
was called Diomedea. It was afterwards reported, that on their flight
they were changed into birds, and that Venus inflicted this punishment,
in consequence of Diomedes having wounded her at the siege of Troy. Of
this story a confused version is here presented by Ovid, who makes the
transformation to take place in the lifetime of Diomedes. It is supposed
that the fact of the island being the favourite resort of swans and
herons, facilitated this story of their transformation. Pliny and
Solinus add to this marvellous account by stating, that these birds
fawned upon all Greeks who entered the island, and fled from the people
of all other nations. Ovid says that the birds resembled swans, while
other writers thought them to be herons, storks, or falcons. The ancient authors are utterly silent as to the rude shepherd who was
changed into a wild olive, but the story was probably derived by Ovid
from some local tradition. 504 xiv. 527-558. FABLES IX. AND X. Turnus sets fire to the fleet of Æneas:
but Cybele transforms the ships into sea Nymphs. After the death of
Turnus, his capital, Ardea, is burnt, and a bird arises out of the
flames. Venus obtains of Jupiter that her son, after so many heroic
deeds, shall be received into the number of the Gods. When the ambassador had returned thence, bringing word that the
Ætolian arms had been refused them, the Rutulians carried on the warfare
prepared for, without their forces; and much blood was shed on either
side. Lo! Turnus bears the devouring torches against the ships ,
fabrics of pine; and those, whom the waves have spared, are now in dread of fire. And now the flames were burning the pitch and the wax,
and the other elements of flame, and were mounting the lofty mast to the
sails, and the benches of the curved ships were smoking; when the holy
Mother of the Gods, remembering that these pines were cut down on the
heights of Ida, filled the air with the tinkling of the clashing cymbal,
and with the noise of the blown boxwood pipe . Borne through the
yielding air by her harnessed lions, she said: “Turnus, in vain dost
thou hurl the flames with thy sacrilegious right hand; I will save the ships , and the devouring flames shall not, with my
permission, burn a portion, and the very limbs of my groves.” As the Goddess speaks, it thunders; and following the thunder, heavy
showers fall, together with bounding hailstones; the brothers, sons of
Astræus, arouse both the air and the swelling waves with sudden
conflicts, and rush to the battle. The genial Mother, using the strength
of one of these, first bursts the hempen cables of the Phrygian fleet,
and carries the ships headlong, and buries them beneath the ocean. Their
hardness being now softened, and their wood being changed into flesh,
the crooked sterns are changed into the features of the head; the oars
taper off in fingers and swimming feet; that which has been so before,
is still the side; and the keel, laid below in the middle of the
ship, is changed, for the purposes of the back bone. The cordage becomes
soft hair, the yards become arms. Their colour is azure, as it
was before. As Naiads of the ocean, with their virgin sports they
agitate those waves, which before they dreaded; and, born on the rugged
mountains, they inhabit the flowing sea; their origin 505 xiv. 558-589. influences them not. And yet, not forgetting how many dangers they
endured on the boisterous ocean, often do they give a helping hand to
the tossed ships; unless any one is carrying men of the Grecian
race. Still keeping in mind the Phrygian catastrophe, they hated the
Pelasgians; and, with joyful countenances, they looked upon the
fragments of the ship of him of Neritos; and with pleasure did they see
the ship of Alcinoüs 46 become hard upon the breakers, and stone
growing over the wood. There is a hope that, the fleet having received life in the form of
sea Nymphs, the Rutulian may desist from the war through fear, on
account of this prodigy. He persists, however , and each side has its own Deities; 47 and they have courage, equal to
the Gods. And now they do not seek kingdoms as a dower, nor the sceptre
of a father-in-law, nor thee, virgin Lavinia, but only to
conquer; and they wage the war through shame at desisting. At length,
Venus sees the arms of her son victorious, and Turnus falls; Ardea
falls, which, while Turnus lived, was called ‘the mighty.’ After
ruthless flames consumed it, and its houses sank down amid the heated
embers, a bird, then known for the first time, flew aloft from the
midst of the heap, and beat the ashes with the flapping of its wings.
The voice, the leanness, the paleness, and every thing that befits a
captured city, and the very name of the city, remain in that bird ; and Ardea itself is bewailed by the beating of its
wings. And now the merit of Æneas had obliged all the Deities, and Juno
herself, to put an end to their former resentment; when, the power of
the rising Iülus being now well established, the hero, the son of
Cytherea, was ripe for heaven, Venus, too, had solicited the Gods above;
and hanging round the neck of her parent had said: “My father, who
hast never proved unkind to me at any time, I beseech
thee now to be most indulgent to me ; and to grant, dearest father , to my Æneas, who, born of my blood, has made thee
a grandsire, 506 xiv. 589-608. a godhead, even though of the lowest class; so that thou
only grant him one. It is enough to have once beheld the unsightly
realms, enough to have once passed over the Stygian streams.” The
Gods assented; nor did his royal wife keep her countenance unmoved; but , with pleased countenance, she nodded assent. Then her father
said; “You are worthy of the gift of heaven; both thou who askest, and
he, for whom thou askest: receive, my daughter, what thou dost desire.” Thus he decrees. She rejoices, and gives thanks to her parent;
and, borne by her harnessed doves through the light air, she arrives at
the Laurentine shores; where Numicius, 48 covered with reeds, winds to
the neighbouring sea with the waters of his stream. Him she bids to wash
off from Æneas whatever is subject to death, and to bear it beneath the
ocean in his silent course. The horned river performed the commands of Venus; and with his
waters washed away from Æneas whatever was mortal, and sprinkled him.
His superior essence remained. His mother anointed his body thus purified with divine odours, and touched his face with ambrosia, mingled
with sweet nectar, and made him a God. Him the people of Quirinus,
called Indiges, 49 and endowed with a temple and with altars. EXPLANATION. It is asserted by some writers, that when the ships of Æneas were set on
fire by Turnus, a tempest arose, which extinguished the flames; on
which circumstance the story here related by Ovid was founded. Perhaps
Virgil was the author of the fiction, as he is the first known to have
related it, and is closely followed by Ovid in the account of the
delivery of the ships. The story of the
heron arising out of the flames of Ardea seems to be 507 xiv. 609-624. founded on a very simple fact. It is merely a poetical method of
accounting for the Latin name of that bird, which was very plentiful in
the vicinity of the city of Ardea, and, perhaps, thence derived its name
of ‘ardea.’ The story may have been the more readily suggested to the
punning mind of Ovid, from the resemblance of the Latin verb ‘ardeo,’
signifying ‘to burn,’ to that name. Some of the ancient authors say, that after killing Turnus and marrying
Lavinia, Æneas was killed in battle with Mezentius, after a reign of
three years, leaving his wife pregnant with a son, afterwards known by
the name of Sylvius. His body not being found after the battle, it was
given out that his Goddess mother had translated him to heaven, and he
was thenceforth honoured by the name of Jupiter Indiges. FABLE XI. Vertumnus , enamoured of Pomona, assumes
several shapes for the purpose of gaining her favour; and having
transformed himself into an old woman, succeeds in effecting his
object. From that time Alba and the Latin state were under the sway of
Ascanius with the two names; 50 Sylvius 51 succeeded him;
sprung of whom, Latinus had a renewed name, together with the ancient
sceptre. Alba succeeded the illustrious Latinus; Epitos sprang from him; and next to him were Capetus, and Capys; but
Capys was the first of these . Tiberinus received the sovereignty
after them; and, drowned in the waves of the Etrurian river, he gave his
name to the stream. By him Remulus and the fierce Acrota were begotten;
Remulus, who was the elder, an imitator of the lightnings,
perished by the stroke 52 of a thunder-bolt. Acrota, more moderate than
his brother in his views , handed down the sceptre to the valiant
Aventinus, who lies buried on the same mount over which he had reigned;
and to that mountain he gave his name. And now Proca held sway over the
Palatine nation. Under this king Pomona lived; than her, no one among 508 xiv. 624-656. the Hamadryads of Latium more skilfully tended her gardens, and no one
was more attentive to the produce of the trees; thence she derives her
name. She cares not for woods, or streams; but she
loves the country, and the boughs that bear the thriving fruit. Her
right hand is not weighed down with a javelin, but with a curved
pruning-knife, with which, at one time she crops the too luxuriant shoots, and reduces the branches that straggle without order;
at another time, she is engrafting the sucker in the divided bark, and
is so finding nourishment for a stranger nursling. Nor does she
suffer them to endure thirst; she waters, too, the winding fibres of the
twisting root with the flowing waters. This is her delight, this her
pursuit; and no desire has she for love. But fearing the violence of the
rustics, she closes her orchard within a wall , and both
forbids and flies from the approach of males. What did not the Satyrs do, a youthful crew expert at the dance, and
the Pans with their brows wreathed with pine, and Sylvanus, ever more
youthful than his years, and the God who scares the thieves either with
his pruning-hook or with his groin, in order that they might gain her?
But yet Vertumnus exceeded even these in his love, nor was he more
fortunate than the rest. O! how often did he carry the ears of corn in a
basket, under the guise of a hardy reaper; and he was the very picture
of a reaper! Many a time, having his temples bound with fresh bay, he
would appear to have been turning over the mowed grass. He often bore a
whip in his sturdy hand, so that you would have sworn that he had that
instant been unyoking the wearied oxen. A pruning-knife being given
him, he was a woodman, and the pruner of the vine. Now he was
carrying a ladder, and you would suppose he was going to gather
fruit. Sometimes he was a soldier, with a sword, and
sometimes a fisherman, taking up the rod; in fact, by means of many
a shape, he often obtained access for himself, that he might enjoy the
pleasure of gazing on her beauty. He, too, having bound his brows with a coloured cap, 53 leaning on
a stick, with white hair placed around his temples, assumed the shape of
an old woman, and entered the well-cultivated 509 xiv. 656-687. gardens, and admired the fruit; and he said, “So much better off art
thou !” and then he gave her, thus commended, a few
kisses, such as no real old woman ever could have given; and
stooping, seated himself upon the grass, looking up at the branches
bending under the load of autumn. There was an elm opposite, widely
spread with swelling grapes; after he had praised it, together with the
vine united to it , he said, “ Aye , but if this trunk stood
unwedded, 54 without the vine, it would have nothing to attract
beyond its leaves; this vine, too, while it finds rest against the elm,
joined to it, if it were not united to it, would lie prostrate on the
ground; and yet thou art not influenced by the example of this
tree, and thou dost avoid marriage, and dost not care to be united.
I only wish that thou wouldst desire it: Helen would not then be wooed by more suitors, nor she who caused the battles of
the Lapithæ, nor the wife of Ulysses, so bold against the
cowards. Even now, while thou dost avoid them courting thee, and dost
turn away in disgust, a thousand suitors desire thee; both Demigod
and Gods, and the Deities which inhabit the mountains of Alba. “But thou, if thou art wise, and if thou dost wish to make a
good match, and to listen to an old woman, (who loves thee more than
them all, and more than thou dost believe) despise a common alliance,
and choose for thyself Vertumnus, as the partner of thy couch; and take
me as a surety for him . He is not better known, even to himself,
than he is to me. He is not wandering about, straying here and there,
throughout all the world; these spots only does he frequent; and he does
not, like a great part of thy wooers, fall in love with her whom he sees
last. Thou wilt be his first and his last love, and to thee alone does
he devote his life. Besides, he is young, he has naturally the gift of
gracefulness, he can readily change himself into every shape, and he
will become whatever he shall be bidden, even shouldst thou bid him be
everything. And 510 xiv. 687-698. besides, have you not both the same tastes? Is not he the
first to have the fruits which are thy delight? and does he not hold thy gifts in his joyous right hand? But now he neither longs for
the fruit plucked from the tree, nor the herbs that the garden produces,
with their pleasant juices, nor anything else, but thyself. Have pity on
his passion! and fancy that he who wooes thee is here present, pleading
with my lips; fear, too, the avenging Deities, and the Idalian Goddess , who abhors cruel hearts, and the vengeful anger of her
of Rhamnus. 55 “And that thou mayst the more stand in awe of them, (for old age has
given me the opportunity of knowing many things) I will relate some
facts very well known throughout all Cyprus, by which thou mayst the
more easily be persuaded and relent.” EXPLANATION. Among the Deities borrowed by the Romans from the people of Etruria,
were Vertumnus and Pomona, who presided over gardens and fruits.
Propertius represents Vertumnus as rejoicing at having left Tusculum for
the Roman Forum. According to Varro and Festus, the Romans offered
sacrifices to these Deities, and they had their respective temples and
altars at Rome, the priest of Pomona being called ‘Flamen Pomonalis.’ It
is probable that this story originated in the fancy of the Poet. The name of Vertumnus, from ‘verto,’ ‘to change,’ perhaps relates to the
vicissitudes of the seasons; and if this story refers to any tradition,
its meaning may have been, that in his taking various forms, to please
Pomona, the change of seasons requisite for bringing the fruits to
ripeness was symbolized. It is possible that in the disguises of a
labourer, a reaper, and an old woman, the Poet may intend to
pourtray the spring, the harvest, and the winter. There was a market at Rome, near the temple of this God, who was
regarded as one of the tutelary Deities of the traders. Horace alludes
to his temple which was in the Vicus Tuscus, or Etrurian Street, which
led to the Circus Maximus. According to some authors, he was an ancient
king of Etruria, who paid great attention to his gardens, and, after his
death, was considered to have the tutelage of them. FABLES XII. AND XIII. Vertumnus relates to Pomona how Anaxarete was
changed into a rock after her disdain of his advances had forced her
lover Iphis to hang himself. After the death of Amulius and Numitor,
Romulus builds Rome, and becomes the first king of it. Tatius declares
war against him, and is favoured by Juno, while Venus protects the
Romans. 511 xiv. 698-726. Romulus and Hersilia are added to the number of the Deities, under the
names of Quirinus and Ora. Iphis, born of an humble family, had beheld the noble Anaxarete,
sprung from the race of the ancient Teucer; 56 he had seen her,
and had felt the flame in all his bones; and struggling a long time,
when he could not subdue his passion by reason, he came suppliantly to
her doors. And now having confessed to her nurse his unfortunate
passion, he besought her, by the hopes she reposed in her
nursling, not to be hard-hearted to him; and at another time,
complimenting each of the numerous servants, he besought their kind
interest with an anxious voice. He often gave his words to be borne on
the flattering tablets; sometimes he fastened garlands, wet with the dew
of his tears, upon the door-posts, and laid his tender side upon the
hard threshold, and uttered reproaches against the obdurate bolt. She, more deaf than the sea, swelling when the Constellation
of the Kids is setting, and harder than the iron which the Norican
fire 57 refines, and than the rock which in its native state
is yet held fast by the firm roots, despises, and laughs at him; and to
her cruel deeds, in her pride, she adds boastful words, and deprives her
lover of even hope. Iphis, unable to endure this prolonged pain, endured
his torments no longer ; and before her doors he spoke these words
as his last: “Thou art the conquerer, Anaxarete; and no more annoyances
wilt thou have to bear from me. Prepare the joyous triumph, invoke the
God Pæan, and crown thyself with the shining laurel. For thou art the
conqueror, and of my own will I die; do thou, woman of iron,
rejoice. At least, thou wilt be obliged to commend something in me, and
there will be one point in which I shall be pleasing to thee, and thou
wilt confess my merits. Yet remember that my affection for thee has not
ended sooner than my life; and that at the same moment I am about to be
deprived of a twofold light. And report shall not come to thee as the 512 xiv. 726-753. messenger of my death; I myself will come, doubt it not; and I
myself will be seen in person, that thou mayst satiate thy cruel eyes
with my lifeless body. But if, ye Gods above, you take cognizance of the
fortunes of mortals, be mindful of me; beyond this, my tongue is unable
to pray; and cause me to be remembered in times far distant; and give
those hours to Fame which you have taken away from my existence.” Thus he said; and raising his swimming eyes and his pallid
arms to the door-posts, so often adorned by him with wreaths, when he
had fastened a noose at the end of a halter upon the door; he
said,— “Are these the garlands that delight thee, cruel and
unnatural woman ?” And he placed his head within it; but even then
he was turned towards her; and he hung a hapless burden, by his
strangled throat. The door, struck by the motion of his feet as they
quivered, seemed to utter a sound, as of one groaning much, and
flying open, it discovered the deed; the servants cried aloud, and after
lifting him up in vain, they carried him to the house of his mother (for
his father was dead). She received him into her bosom; and embracing the
cold limbs of her child, after she had uttered the words that are natural to wretched mothers, and had performed the usual actions of wretched mothers, she was preceding 58 the tearful
funeral through the midst of the city, and was carrying his ghastly
corpse on the bier, to be committed to the flames. By chance, her house was near the road where the mournful procession
was passing, and the sound of lamentation came to the ears of the
hardhearted Anaxarete, whom now an avenging Deity pursued. Moved,
however, she said:— “Let us behold these sad obsequies;” and she
ascended to an upper room 59 with wide windows. And scarce had
she well 513 xiv. 753-785. seen Iphis laid out on the bier, when her eyes became stiffened,
and a paleness coming on, the warm blood fled from her body. And as she
endeavoured to turn her steps back again, she stood fixed there ;
and as she endeavoured to turn away her face, this too she was unable to
do; and by degrees the stone, which already existed in her cruel breast,
took possession of her limbs. “And, that thou mayst not think this a fiction, Salamis still keeps
the statue under the form of the maiden; it has also a temple under the
name of ‘Venus, the looker-out.’ Remembering these things, O Nymph,
lay aside this prolonged disdain, and unite thyself to one who loves
thee. Then, may neither cold in the spring nip thy fruit in the bud, nor
may the rude winds strike them off in blossom.” When the God, fitted for
every shape, had in vain uttered these words, he returned to his
youthful form, 60 and took off from himself the garb of the old woman.
And such did he appear to her, as, when the form of the sun, in all his
brilliancy, has dispelled the opposing clouds, and has shone forth, no
cloud intercepting his rays . And he now purposed violence,
but there was no need for force, and the Nymph was captivated by the
form of the God, and was sensible of a reciprocal wound. Next, the soldiery of the wicked Amulius held sway over the realms of
Ausonia; and by the aid of his grandsons, the aged Numitor gained the
kingdom that he had lost; and on the festival of Pales, the walls of the
City were founded. Tatius and the Sabine fathers waged war; and then , the way to the citadel being laid open, by a just
retribution, Tarpeia lost her life, the arms being heaped upon
her . On this, they, sprung from the town of Cures, just like
silent wolves, suppressed their voices with their lips, and fell upon
the bodies now overpowered by sleep, and rushed to the gates,
which the son of Ilia had shut with a strong bolt. But Juno , the
daughter of Saturn, herself opened one, and made not a sound at the
turning of the hinge. Venus alone perceived that the bars of the gate
had fallen down; and she would have shut it, were it not, that it is 514 xiv. 785-820. never allowed for a Deity to annul the acts of the other Gods.
The Naiads of Ausonia occupied a spot near the temple of Janus, a place besprinkled by a cold fountain; of these she
implored aid. Nor did the Nymphs resist, the Goddess making so fair a
request; and they gave vent to the springs and the streams of the
fountain. But not yet were the paths closed to the open temple of Janus, and the water had not stopped the way. They placed sulphur, with
its faint blue light, beneath the plenteous fountain, and they applied
fire to the hollowed channels, with smoking pitch. By these and other violent means, the vapour penetrated to the very
sources of the fountain; and you , ye waters, which, so lately,
were able to rival the coldness of the Alps, yielded not in heat to the flames themselves. The two door-posts smoked with the flaming
spray; and the gate, which was in vain left open for the fierce Sabines,
was rendered impassable by this new-made fountain, until the warlike
soldiers had assumed their arms. After Romulus had readily led them
onward, and the Roman ground was covered with Sabine bodies, and was
covered with its own people, and the accursed sword had mingled
the blood of the son-in-law with the gore of the father-in-law; they
determined that the war should end in peace, and that they would not
contend with weapons to the last extremity, and that Tatius should share
in the sovereignty. Tatius was now dead, and thou, Romulus, wast giving laws in
common to both peoples; when Mavors, 61 his helmet laid aside, in
such words as these addressed the Parent of both Gods and men: “The time
is now come, O father, (since the Roman state is established
on a strong foundation, and is no longer dependent on the guardianship
of but one), for thee to give the reward which was promised to me, and
to thy grandson so deserving of it, and, removed from earth, to
admit him to heaven. Thou saidst to me once, a council of the Gods
being present, (for I remember it, and with grateful mind I remarked the
affectionate speech), he shall be one, whom thou shalt raise to the
azure heaven. Let the tenor of thy words be now performed.” The all-powerful God nodded in assent, and he obscured the air
with thick clouds, and alarmed the City with thunder and lightning.
Gradivus knew that this was a signal given to 515 xiv. 820-848. him for the promised removal; and, leaning on his lance, he boldly
mounted behind his steeds, laden with the blood-stained pole of the chariot , and urged them on with the lash of the whip; and
descending along the steep air, he stood on the summit of the hill of
the woody Palatium; and he took away the son of Ilia, that moment giving
out his royal ordinances to his own Quirites. His mortal body glided
through the yielding air; just as the leaden plummet, discharged from
the broad sling, is wont to dissolve itself 62 in mid air.
A beauteous appearance succeeded, one more suitable to the lofty
couches 63 of heaven, and a form, such as that of Quirinus
arrayed in his regal robe. His wife was lamenting him as lost; when the
royal Juno commanded Iris to descend to Hersilia, along her bending
path; and thus to convey to the bereft wife her
commands:— “O matron, the especial glory of the Latian and of the Sabine race;
thou woman, most worthy to have been before the wife of a hero so great, and now of Quirinus; cease thy weeping, and if thou hast a wish
to see thy husband, under my guidance repair to the grove which
flourishes on the hill of Quirinus, and overshadows the temple of the
Roman king.” Iris obeys, and gliding down to earth along her tinted bow,
she addressed Hersilia in the words enjoined. She, with a modest
countenance, hardly raising her eyes, replies, “O Goddess, (for though it is not in my power to say who thou art, yet ,
still it is clear that thou art a Goddess), lead me, O lead me on,
and present to me the features of my husband. If the Fates should but
allow me to be enabled once to behold these, I will confess that I
have beheld Heaven.” There was no delay; with the virgin daughter of Thaumas she ascended
the hill of Romulus. There, a star falling from the skies, fell
upon the earth; the hair of Hersilia set on fire from the blaze of this,
ascended with the star to the skies. 516 xiv. 849-851 . The founder of the Roman city received her with his well-known hands;
and, together with her body, he changed her former name; and he called
her Ora; which Goddess is still united to Quirmus. EXPLANATION. We are not informed that the story of Iphis, hanging himself for love of
Anaxarete, is based upon any actual occurrence, though probably it was,
as Salamis is mentioned as the scene of it. The transformation of
Anaxarete into a stone, seems only to be the usual metaphor employed by
the poets to denote extreme insensibility. Following the example of Homer, who represents the Gods as divided into
the favourers of the Greeks and of the Trojans, he represents the
Sabines as entering Rome, while Juno opens the gates for them; on which
the Nymphs of the spot pour forth streams of flame, which oblige them to
return. He tells the same story in the first Book of the Fasti, where
Janus is introduced as taking credit to himself for doing what the
Nymphs are here said to have effected. As Dionysius of Halicarnassus gives some account of these transactions,
on the authority of the ancient Roman historians, it will be sufficient
here to give the substance thereof. Jealous of the increasing power of
Romulus, the Sabines collected an army, and marched to attack his city.
A virgin named Tarpeia, whose father commanded the guard,
perceiving the golden bracelets which the Sabines wore on their arms,
offered Tatius to open the gate to him, if he would give her these
jewels. This condition being assented to, the enemy was admitted into
the town; and Tarpeia, who is said by some writers only to have intended
to disarm the Sabines, by demanding their bucklers, which she pretended
were included in the original agreement, was killed on the spot, by the
violence of the blows; Tatius having ordered that they should be thrown
on her head. The same historian says, that opinions were divided as to the death of
Romulus, and that many writers had written, that as he was haranguing
his army, the sky became overcast, and a thick darkness coming on, it
was followed by a violent tempest, in which he disappeared; on which it
was believed that Mars had taken him up to heaven. Others assert that he
was killed by the citizens, for having sent back the hostages of the
Veientes without their consent, and for assuming an air of superiority,
which their lawless spirits could ill brook. For these reasons, his
officers assassinated him, and cut his body in pieces; each of them
carrying off some portion, that it might be privately interred.
According to Livy, great consternation was the consequence of his death;
and the people beginning to suspect that the senators had committed the
crime, Julius Proculus asserted that Romulus had appeared to him, and
assured him of the fact of his having been Deified. His speech on the
occasion is given by Livy, and Ovid relates the same story in the second
Book of the Fasti. On this, the Roman people paid him divine honours as
a God, under the name of Quirinus, one of the epithets of Mars. He had a
chief priest, who was called ‘Flamen Quirinalis.’ His wife, Hersilia, also had divine honours paid to her, jointly with
him, under the name of Ora, or ‘Horta.’ According to Plutarch, she had
the latter name from the exhortation which she had given to the youths
to distinguish themselves by courage. 1. Rhegium. ]—Ver. 5. Rhegium was a city of Calabria, opposite
to the coast of Sicily. 2. Venus offended. ]—Ver. 27. The Sun, or Apollo, the father of
Circe, as the Poet has already related in his fourth Book, betrayed the
intrigues of Mars with Venus. 3. Shalt be courted. ]—Ver. 31. She means that he shall be
courted, but by herself. 4. Of strange words. ]—Ver. 57. ‘Obscurum verborum ambage
novorum’ is rendered by Clarke, ‘Darkened with a long rabble of new
words.’ 5. By the winds. ]—Ver. 77. The storm in which Æneas is cast
upon the shores of Africa forms the subject of part of the first Book of
the Æneid. 6. And pays honour. ]—Ver. 84. The annual games which Æneas
instituted at the tomb of his father, in Sicily, are fully described in
the fifth Book of the Æneid. 7. The Sirens. ]—Ver. 87. The Sirens were said to have been the
daughters of the river Acheloüs. Their names are Parthenope, Lysia, and
Leucosia. 8. Deprived of its pilot. ]—Ver. 88. This was Palinurus, who,
when asleep, fell overboard, and was drowned. See the end of the fifth
Book of the Æneid. 9. Inarime. ]—Ver. 89. This was an island not far from the
coast of Campania, which was also called Ischia and Ænaria. The word
‘Inarime’ is thought to have been coined by Virgil, from the expression
of Homer, εῖν
Ἀρίμοις , when speaking of it, as that writer is the first who is
found to use it, and is followed by Ovid, Lucan, and others. Strabo
tells us, that ‘aremus’ was the Etrurian name for an ape; if so, the
name of this spot may account for the name of Pithecusæ, the adjoining
islands, if the tradition here related by the Poet really existed. Pliny
the Elder, however, says that Pithecusæ were so called from πίθος , an earthern cask, or vessel, as
there were many potteries there. 10. Prochyta. ]—Ver. 89. This island was said to have been torn
away from the isle of Inarime by an earthquake; for which reason it
received its name from the Greek verb προχέω , which means ‘to pour forth.’ 11. Parthenope. ]—Ver. 101. The city of Naples, or Neapolis, was
called Parthenope from the Siren of that name, who was said to have been
buried there. 12. Son of Æolus. ]—Ver. 103. Misenus, the trumpeter, was said
to have been the son of Æolus. From him the promontory Misenum received
its name. 13. Long-lived Sibyl. ]—Ver. 104. The Sibyls were said by some
to have their name from the fact of their revealing the will of the
Deities, as in the Æolian dialect, Σιὸς was ‘a God,’ and βουλὴ was the Greek for ‘will.’ According to other
writers, they were so called from Σίου βύλλη , ‘full of the Deity.’ 14. Juno of Avernus. ]—Ver. 114. The Infernal, or Avernian Juno,
is a title sometimes given by the poets to Proserpine. 15. Eubœan city. ]—Ver. 155. ‘Cumæ’ was said to have been
founded by a colony from Chalcis, in Eubœa. 16. Of his nurse. ]—Ver. 157. Caieta was the name of the nurse
of Æneas, who was said to have been buried there by him. 17. Barbarian. ]—Ver. 163. That is, Trojan; to the Greeks all
people but themselves were βαρβαροὶ . 18. His own master. ]—Ver. 166. ‘Now his own master,’ in
contradistinction to the time when Macareus looked on himself as the
devoted victim of Polyphemus. 19. Nearly causing. ]—Ver. 181. Homer, in the Ninth Book of the
Odyssey, recounts how Ulysses, after having put out the eye of
Polyphemus, fled to his own ship, and when the Giant followed, called
out to him, disclosing his real name; whereas, he had before told the
Cyclop that his name was οὔτις , ‘nobody.’ By this indiscreet action, the Cyclop
was able to ascertain the locality of the ship, and nearly sank it with
a mass of rock which he hurled in that direction. 20. I imagined that. ]—Ver. 203-4. ‘Et jam prensurum, jam, jam
mea viscera rebar In sua mersurum.’ Clarke thus renders these words;
‘And now I thought he would presently whip me up, and cram my bowels
within his own.’ 21. The ancient city. ]—Ver. 233. This city was afterwards known
as Formiæ, in Campania. 22. An island. ]—Ver. 245. Macareus here points towards the
promontory of Circæum, which was supposed to have formerly been an
island. 23. Too much addicted. ]—Ver. 252. He alludes to the fate of
Elpenor, who afterwards, in a fit of intoxication, fell down stairs, and
broke his neck. 24. Twice nine. ]—Ver. 253. Homer mentions Eurylochus and
twenty-two others as the number, being one more than the number here
given by Ovid. 25. As weighed. ]—Ver. 270. Of course drugs and simples would
require to be weighed before being mixed in their due proportions. 26. Call it ‘Moly.’ ]—Ver. 292. Homer, in the tenth Book of the
Odyssey, says that this plant had a black root, and a flower like
milk. 27. Become attached. ]—Ver. 304-5. ‘Subjecta lacertis Brachia
sunt,’ Clarke has not a very lucid translation of these words. His
version is, ‘Brachia are put under our lacerti.’ The ‘brachium’ was the
forearm, or part, from the wrist to the elbow; while the ‘lacertus’ was
the muscular part, between the elbow and the shoulder. 28. Albula. ]—Ver. 328. The ancient name of the river Tiber was
Albula. It was so called from the whiteness of its water. 29. But very short. ]—Ver. 329. The Almo falls in the Tiber,
close to its own source, whence its present epithet. 30. Rapid Nar. ]—Ver. 330. The ‘Nar’ was a river of Umbria,
which fell into the Tiber. 31. Farfarus. ]—Ver. 330. This river, flowing slowly through the
valleys of the country of the Sabines, received a pleasant shade from
the trees with which its banks were lined. 32. Scythian. ]—Ver. 331. He alludes to the statue of the
Goddess Diana, which, with her worship, Orestes was said to have brought
from the Tauric Chersonesus, and to have established at Aricia, in
Latium. See the Fasti, Book III. l. 263, and Note. 33. Ionian Janus. ]—Ver. 334. Janus was so called because he was
thought to have come from Thessaly, and to have crossed the Ionian
Sea. 34. Canens. ]—Ver. 338. This name literally means ‘singing,’
being the present participle of the Latin verb ‘cano,’ ‘to sing.’ 35. Inflicted wounds. ]—Ver. 392. The woodpecker is supposed to
tap the bark of the tree with his beak, to ascertain, from the sound, if
it is hollow, and if there are any insects beneath it. 36. Tartessian shores. ]—Ver. 416. ‘Tartessia’ is here used as a
general term for Western, as Tartessus was a city of the Western coast
of Spain. It afterwards had the name of Carteia, and is thought to have
been situated not far from the site of the present Cadiz, at the mouth
of the Bætis, now called the Guadalquivir. Some suppose this name to be
the same with the Tarshish of Scripture. 37. Son of Faunus. ]—Ver. 449. The parents of Latinus were
Faunus and Marica. 38. Betrothed to him. ]—Ver. 451. Amata, the mother of Lavinia,
had promised her to Turnus, in spite of the oracle of Faunus, which had
declared that she was destined for a foreign husband. 39. Evander. ]—Ver. 456. His history is given by Ovid in the
first Book of the Fasti. 40. Narycian hero. ]—Ver. 468. Naryx, which was also called
Narycium and Naryce, was a city of Locris. He alludes to the divine
vengeance which punished Ajax Oïleus, who had ravished Cassandra in the
temple of Minerva. For this reason the Greeks were said to have been
afflicted with shipwreck, on their return after the destruction of
Troy. 41. Threatening. ]—Ver. 481. ‘Importunis’ is translated by
Clarke, ‘plaguy.’ For some account of Caphareus, see the Tristia, or
Lament, Book I. El. 1. l. 83. and note. 42. Pleuronian. ]—Ver. 494. Pleuron was a town of Ætolia,
adjoining to Epirus. 43. Calydonian. ]—Ver. 512. That part of Apulia, which Diomedes
received from Daunus, as a dower with his wife, was called Calydon, from
the city of Calydon, in his native Ætolia. 44. Peucetian. ]—Ver. 513. Apulia was divided by the river
Aufidus into two parts, Peucetia and Daunia. Peucetia was to the East,
and Daunia lay to the West. According to Antoninus Liberalis, Daunus,
Iapyx, and Peucetius, the sons of Lycaon, were the first to colonize
these parts. 45. Messapian. ]—Ver. 513. Messapia was a name given to a part
of Calabria, from its king Messapus, who aided Turnus against Æneas. 46. Ship of Alcinoüs. ]—Ver. 565. Alcinoüs, the king of the
Phæacians, having saved Ulysses from shipwreck, gave him a ship in which
to return to Ithaca. Neptune, to revenge the injuries of his son
Polyphemus, changed the ship into a rock. 47. Its own Deities. ]—Ver. 568. The Trojans were aided by
Venus, while Juno favoured the Rutulians. 48. Numicius. ]—Ver. 599. Livy, in the first Book of his
History, seems to say that Æneas lost his life in a battle, fought near
the Numicius, a river of Latium. He is generally supposed to have
been drowned there. 49. Indiges. ]—Ver. 608. Cicero says, that ‘those, who for their
merits were reckoned in the number of the Gods, and who formerly living
on earth, and afterwards lived among the Gods (in Diis agerent), were
called Indigetes;’ thus implying that the word ‘Indiges’ came from ‘in
Diis ago;’ ‘to live among the Gods.’ This seems a rather far-fetched
derivation. The true meaning of the word seems to be ‘native,’ or
‘indigenous;’ and it applies to a person Deified, and considered as a
tutelary Deity of his native country. Most probably, it is derived from
‘in,’ or ‘indu,’ the old Latin form of ‘in,’ and γείνω (for γίνομαι ), ‘to be born.’ Some would derive the word from
‘in,’ negative, and ‘ago,’ to speak, as signifying Deities, whose names
were not be mentioned. 50. The two names. ]—Ver. 609. The other name of Ascanius was
Iülus. Alba Longa was built by Ascanius. 51. Sylvius. ]—Ver. 610. See the lists of the Alban kings, as
given by Ovid, Livy, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, and Eusebius, compared
in the notes to the Translation of the Fasti, Book IV. line 43. 52. By the stroke. ]—Ver. 618. Possibly both Remulus (if there
ever was such a person) and Tullus Hostilius may have fallen victims to
some electrical experiments which they were making; this may have given
rise to the story that they had been struck with lightning for imitating
the prerogative of Jupiter. 53. A coloured cap. ]—Ver. 654. ‘Pictâ redimitus tempora mitrâ,’
is rendered by Clarke, ‘Having his temples wrapped up in a painted
bonnet.’ The ‘mitra,’ which was worn on the head by females, was a broad
cloth band of various colours. The use of it was derived from the
Eastern nations, and, probably, it was very similar to our turban. It
was much used by the Phrygians, and in later times among the Greeks and
Romans. It is supposed that it was worn in a broad fillet round the
head, and was tied under the chin with bands. When Clodius went
disguised in female apparel to the rites of Bona Dea, he wore a
‘mitra.’ 54. Stood unwedded. ]—Ver. 663. Ovid probably derived this
notion from the language of the Roman husbandmen. Columella and other
writers on agricultural matters often make mention of a ‘maritus ulmus,’
and a ‘nupta vitis,’ in contradistinction to those trees which stood by
themselves. 55. Her of Rhamnus. ]—Ver. 694. See Book III. l. 406. 56. Ancient Teucer. ]—Ver. 698. When Teucer returned home after
the Trojan war, his father Telamon banished him, for not having revenged
the death of his brother Ajax, which was imputed to Ulysses, as having
been the occasion of it, by depriving him of the armour of Achilles.
Thus exiled, he fled to Cyprus, where he founded the city of
Salamis. 57. Norican fire. ]—Ver. 712. Noricum was a district of Germany,
between the Danube and the Alps. It is still famous for its excellent
steel; the goodness of which, Pliny attributes partly to the superior
quality of the ore, and partly to the temperature of the climate. 58. She was preceding. ]—Ver. 746. It was customary for the
relations, both male and female, to attend the body to the tomb or the
funeral pile. Among the Greeks, the male relatives walked in front of
the body, preceded by the head mourners, while the female relations
walked behind. Among the Romans, all the relations walked behind the
corpse; the males having their heads veiled, and the females with their
heads bare and hair dishevelled, contrary to the usual practice of each
sex. 59. An upper room. ]—Ver. 752. Anaxarete went to an upper room,
to look out into the street, as the apartments on the ground floor were
rarely lighted with windows. The principal apartments on the ground
floor received their light from above, and the smaller rooms there,
usually derived their light from the larger ones; while on the other
hand, the rooms on the upper floor were usually lighted with windows.
The conduct of Anaxarete reminds us of that of Marcella, the hardhearted
shepherdess, which so aroused the indignation of the amiable, but
unfortunate, Don Quixotte. 60. His youthful form. ]—Ver. 766-7. ‘In juvenem rediit: et
anilia demit Instrumenta sibi.’ These words are thus translated by
Clarke: ‘He returned into a young fellow, and takes off his old woman’s
accoutrements from him.’ We hear of the accoutrements of a cavalry
officer much more frequently than we do those of an old woman. 61. Mavors. ]—Ver. 806. Mavors, which is often used by the poets
as a name of Mars, probably gave rise to the latter name as a contracted
form of it. 62. To dissolve itself. ]—Ver. 826. Not only, as we have already
remarked, was it a notion among the ancients that the leaden plummet
thrown from the sling grew red hot; but they occasionally went still
further, and asserted that, from the rapidity of the motion, it melted
and disappeared altogether. See note to Book II. l. 727. 63. Lofty couches. ]—Ver. 827. The ‘pulvinaria’ were the
cushions, or couches, placed in the temples of the Gods, for the use of
the Divinities; which probably their priests (like their brethren who
administered to Bel) did not omit to enjoy. At the festivals of the
‘lectisternia,’ the statues of the Gods were placed upon these cushions.
The images of the Deities in the Roman Circus, were also placed on a
‘pulvinar.’ 517 BOOK THE FIFTEENTH. FABLE I. Myscelos is warned, in a dream, to
leave Argos, and to settle in Italy. When on the point of departing, he
is seized under a law which forbids the Argives to leave the city
without the permission of the magistrates. Being brought up for
judgment, through a miracle he is acquitted. He retires to Italy, where
he builds the city of Crotona. Meanwhile, one is being sought who can bear a weight of such
magnitude, and can succeed a king so great. Fame, the harbinger of
truth, destines the illustrious Numa for the sovereign power. He does
not deem it sufficient to be acquainted with the ceremonials of the
Sabine nation; in his expansive mind he conceives greater views, and
inquires into the nature of things. ’Twas love of this pursuit, his
country and cares left behind, that caused him to penetrate to the city
of the stranger Hercules. To him, making the inquiry what founder it was
that had erected a Grecian city on the Italian shores, one of the more
aged natives, who was not unacquainted with the history of the
past, thus replied: “The son of Jove, enriched with the oxen of Iberia, is said to have
reached the Lacinian shores, 1 from the ocean, after a prosperous
voyage, and, while his herd was straying along the soft pastures,
himself to have entered the abode of the great Croton, no inhospitable
dwelling, and to have rested in repose after his prolonged labours, and
to have said thus at departing: ‘In the time of thy grandsons this shall
be the site of a city;’ and his promise was fulfilled. For there was a
certain Myscelos, the son of Alemon, an Argive, most favoured by the
Gods in those times. Lying upon him, as he is overwhelmed with the
drowsiness of sleep, the club-bearer, Hercules , addresses him:
‘Come, now , desert thy native abodes; go, and repair to
the pebbly streams of the distant Æsar.’ 2 And he utters 518 xv. 24-52. threats, many and fearful, if he does not obey: after that, at once both
sleep and the God depart. The son of Alemon arises, and ponders his
recent vision in his thoughtful mind; and for a long time his opinions
are divided among themselves. The Deity orders him to depart; the laws
forbid his going; and death has been awarded as the punishment of him
who attempts to leave his country. “The brilliant Sun had now hidden his shining head in the
ocean, and darkest Night had put forth her starry face, when the
same God seemed to be present, and to give the same commands, and to
utter threats, more numerous and more severe, if he does not obey. He
was alarmed; and now he was also preparing to transfer his
country’s home to a new settlement, when a rumour arose in the
city, and he was accused of holding the laws in contempt. And, when the
accusation had first been made, and his crime was evident, proved
without a witness, the accused, in neglected garb, raising his face and
his hands towards the Gods above, says, ‘Oh thou! for whom the twice six
labours have created the privilege of the heavens, aid me, I pray;
for thou wast the cause of my offence.’ It was the ancient custom, by
means of white and black pebbles, with the one to condemn the accused,
with the other to acquit them of the charge; and on this occasion thus
was the sad sentence passed, and every black pebble was cast into the
ruthless urn. Soon as it, being inverted, poured forth the pebbles to be
counted, the colour of them all was changed from black to white, and the
sentence, changed to a favourable one by the aid of Hercules, acquitted
the son of Alemon. “He gives thanks to the parent, the son of Amphitryon, 3 and with
favouring gales sails over the Ionian sea, and passes by the
Lacedæmonian Tarentum, 4 and Sybaris, and the Salentine Neæthus, 5 and the
bay of Thurium, 6 and Temesa, and the 519 xv. 52-60. fields of Iapyx; 7 and having with difficulty coasted along the spots
which skirt these shores, he finds the destined mouth of the river Æsar;
and, not far thence, a mound, beneath which the ground was covering
the sacred bones of Croton. And there, on the appointed land, did he
found his walls, and he transferred the name of him that was there entombed to his city. By established tradition, it was
known that such was the original of that place, and of the city built on
the Italian coasts.” EXPLANATION. To the story here told of Micylus, or Myscelus, as most of the ancient
writers call him, another one was superadded. Suidas, on the authority
of the Scholiast of Aristophanes, says that Myscelus, having consulted
the oracle, concerning the colony which he was about to lead into a
foreign country, was told that he must settle at the place where he
should meet with rain in a clear sky, ἐξ αἰθρίας . His faith surmounting the apparent
impossibility of having both fair and foul weather at the same moment,
he obeyed the oracle, and put to sea; and, after experiencing many
dangers, he landed in Italy. Being full of uncertainty where to fix his
colony, he was reduced to great distress; on which his wife, whose name
was Aithrias, with the view of comforting him, embraced him, and bedewed
his face with her tears. He immediately adopted the presage, and
understood the spot where he then was to be the site of his intended
city. Strabo says that Myscelus, who was so called from the smallness of his
legs, designing to found a colony in a foreign land, arrived on the
coast of Italy. Observing that the spot which the oracle had pointed out
enjoyed a healthy climate, though the soil was not so fertile as in the
adjacent plains, he went once more to consult the oracle; but was
answered that he must not refuse what was offered him; an answer which
was afterwards turned into a proverb. On this, he founded the city of
Crotona, and another colony founded the city of Sybaris on the spot
which he had preferred; a place which afterwards became infamous
for its voluptuousness and profligacy. FABLES II. AND III. Pythagoras comes to the city of
Crotona, and teaches the principles of his philosophy. His reputation
draws Numa Pompilius to hear his discourses; on which he expounds his
principles, and, more especially, enlarges on the transmigration of the
soul, and the practice of eating animal food. There was a man, a Samian by birth; but he had fled from both Samos
and its rulers, 8 and, through hatred of tyranny, 520 xv. 60-98. he was a voluntary exile. He too, mentally, held converse with the Gods,
although far distant in the region of the heavens; and what nature
refused to human vision, he viewed with the eyes of his mind. And when
he had examined all things with his mind, and with watchful study, he
gave them to be learned by the public; and he sought the crowds of
people as they sat in silence, and wondered at the revealed
origin of the vast universe, and the cause of things, and what nature meant , and what was God; whence came the snow, what was
the cause of lightning; whether it was Jupiter, or whether the
winds that thundered when the cloud was rent asunder; what it was that
shook the earth; by what laws the stars took their course; and whatever besides lay concealed from mortals . He, too, was the first to forbid animals to be served up at table,
and he was the first that opened his lips, learned indeed, but still not
obtaining credit, in such words as these: “Forbear, mortals, to pollute
your bodies with such abominable food. There is the corn; there
are the apples that bear down the branches by their weight, and there
are the grapes swelling upon the vines; there are the herbs that are
pleasant; there are some that can become tender, and be softened by the action of fire. The flowing milk, too, is not denied you, nor
honey redolent of the bloom of the thyme. The lavish Earth yields her
riches, and her agreable food, and affords dainties without slaughter
and bloodshed. The beasts satisfy their hunger with flesh; and yet not
all of them; for the horse, and the sheep, and the herds subsist on
grass. But those whose disposition is cruel and fierce, the Armenian
tigers, and the raging lions, and the bears together with the wolves,
revel in their diet with blood. Alas! what a crime is it, for entrails
to be buried in entrails, and for one ravening body to grow fat on other carcases crammed into it; and for one living
creature to exist through the death of another living creature! And
does, forsooth! amid so great an abundance, which the earth, that best
of mothers, produces, nothing delight you but to gnaw with savage teeth
the sad produce of your wounds, and to revive the habits of the
Cyclops? And can you not appease the hunger of a voracious and
ill-regulated stomach unless you first destroy another? But that age of
old, to which we have given the name of ‘Golden,’ was blest in the 521 xv. 98-131. produce of the trees, and in the herbs which the earth produces, and it
did not pollute the mouth with blood. “Then, both did the birds move their wings in safety in the air, and
the hare without fear wander in the midst of the fields; then its own
credulity had not suspended the fish from the hook; every place was
without treachery, and in dread of no injury, and was full of peace.
Afterwards, some one , no good adviser 9 (whoever among mortals
he might have been), envied this simple food, and engulphed in his
greedy paunch victuals made from a carcase; ’twas he that opened the
path to wickedness; and I can believe that the steel, since stained with blood, first grew warm from the slaughter of wild beasts.
And that had been sufficient. I confess that the bodies of
animals that seek our destruction are put to death with no breach of
the sacred laws; but, although they might be put to death, yet they were
not to be eaten as well. Then this wickedness proceeded still further;
and the swine is believed to have deserved death as the first victim,
because it grubbed up the seeds with its turned-up snout, and cut short
the hopes of the year. Having gnawed the vine, the goat was led 10 for
slaughter to the altars of the avenging Bacchus. Their own faults were
the ruin of the two. But why have you deserved this, ye sheep?
a harmless breed, and born for the service of man; who carry the
nectar in your full udders; who afford your wool as soft coverings for
us, and who assist us more by your life than by your death. Why have the
oxen deserved this, an animal without guile and deceit, innocent,
harmless, born to endure labour? In fact, the man is ungrateful, and not
worthy of the gifts of the harvest, who could, just after taking off the
weight of the curving plough, slaughter the tiller of his fields; who
could strike, with the axe, that neck worn bare with labour, through
which he had so oft turned up the hard ground, and had afforded
so many a harvest. “And it is not enough for such wickedness to be committed; they have
imputed to the Gods themselves this abomination; and they believe that a
Deity in the heavens can rejoice in the slaughter of the laborious ox.
A victim free from a blemish, and most beauteous in form (for ’tis
being sightly that 522 xv. 131-162. brings destruction), adorned with garlands and gold, is placed upon the
altars, and, in its ignorance, it hears one praying, and sees the corn,
which it has helped to produce, placed on its forehead between its
horns; and, felled, it stains with its blood the knives perhaps before
seen by it in the limpid water. Immediately, they examine the entrails
snatched from its throbbing breast, and in them they seek out the
intentions of the Deities. Whence comes it that men have so great a
hankering for forbidden food? Do you presume to feed on flesh ,
O race of mortals? Do it not, I beseech you; and give
attention to my exhortations. And when you shall be presenting the limbs
of slaughtered oxen to your palates, know and consider that you are
devouring your tillers of the ground . And since a God impels me
to speak, I will duly obey the God that so prompts me to
speak; and I will pronounce my own Delphic warnings , and disclose
the heavens themselves; and I will reveal the oracles of the Divine
will. I will sing of wondrous things, never investigated by the
intellects of the ancients, and things which have long lain
concealed. It delights me to range among the lofty stars; it delights
me, having left the earth and this sluggish spot far behind , to
be borne amid the clouds, and to be supported on the shoulders of the
mighty Atlas; and to look down from afar on minds wandering in
uncertainty , and devoid of reason; and so to advise them alarmed and
dreading extinction, and to unfold the range of things ordained by
fate. “O race! stricken by the alarms of icy death, why do you dread Styx?
why the shades, why empty names, the stock subjects of the poets, and
the atonements of an imaginary world? Whether the funeral pile consumes
your bodies with flames, or old age with gradual dissolution, believe
that they cannot suffer any injury. Souls are not subject to death; and
having left their former abode, they ever inhabit new dwellings, and, there received, live on. “I, myself, for I remember it, in the days of the Trojan war, was
Euphorbus, 11 the son of Panthoüs, in whose opposing 523 xv. 162-195. breast once was planted the heavy spear of the younger son of Atreus.
I lately recognised the shield, once the burden of my left
arm, in the temple of Juno, at Argos, the realm of Abas. All things are ever changing; nothing perishes. The soul wanders about and comes
from that spot to this, from this to that, and takes possession of any
limbs whatever; it both passes from the beasts to human bodies, and so does our soul into the beasts; and in no lapse of time does it perish. And as the pliable wax is moulded into new
forms, and no longer abides as it was before , nor
preserves the same shape, but yet is still the same wax , so I
tell you that the soul is ever the same, but passes into different
forms. Therefore, that natural affection may not be vanquished by the
craving of the appetite, cease, I warn you, to expel the souls of
your kindred from their bodies by this dreadful slaughter; and
let not blood be nourished with blood. “And, since I am now borne over the wide ocean, and I have
given my full sails to the winds, there is nothing in all the world that
continues in the same state. All things are flowing onward , 12 and every shape is assumed in a fleeting course.
Even time itself glides on with a constant progress, no otherwise than a
river. For neither can the river, nor the fleeting hour stop in its
course; but, as wave is impelled by wave, and the one before is pressed
on by that which follows, and itself presses on that before it;
so do the moments similarly fly on, and similarly do they follow, and
they are ever renewed. For the moment which was before, is past; and
that which was not, now exists; and every minute is replaced. You
see, too, the night emerge and proceed onward to the dawn, and this
brilliant light of the day succeed the dark night. Nor is there the same
appearance in the heavens, when all things in their weariness lie in the
midst of repose, and when Lucifer is coming forth on his white steed;
and, again, there is another appearance, when Aurora , the
daughter of Pallas, preceding the day, tints the world about to be
delivered to Phœbus. The disk itself of that God, when it is
rising from beneath the earth, is of ruddy colour in the morning, and
when it is hiding beneath the earth it is of a ruddy colour. At its
height it is of brilliant whiteness, because there the nature of the
æther 524 xv. 195-229. is purer, and far away, he avoids all infection from the earth.
Nor can there ever be the same or a similar appearance of the nocturnal
Diana; and always that of the present day is less than on the morrow, if
she is on the increase; but greater if she is contracting her
orb. “And further. Do you not see the year, affording a resemblance of our
life, assume four different appearances? for, in early Spring, it
is mild, and like a nursling, and greatly resembling the age of
youth. Then, the blade is shooting, and void of strength, it swells, and
is flaccid, and delights the husbandman in his expectations. Then, all
things are in blossom, and the genial meadow smiles with the tints of
its flowers; and not as yet is there any vigour in the leaves. The year now waxing stronger, after the Spring, passes into the Summer;
and in its youth it becomes robust. And indeed no season is there more
vigorous, or more fruitful, or which glows with greater warmth. Autumn
follows, the ardour of youth now removed, ripe, and placed
between youth and old age, moderate in his temperature, with a few white hairs sprinkled over his temples. Then comes aged
Winter, repulsive with his tremulous steps, either stript of his locks,
or white with those which he has. “Our own bodies too are changing always and without any intermission,
and to-morrow we shall not be what we were or what we now are.
The time was, when only as embryos, and the earliest hope of human
beings, we lived in the womb of the mother. Nature applied her skilful
hands, and willed not that our bodies should be tortured by being
shut up within the entrails of the distended parent, and brought us
forth from our dwelling into the vacant air. Brought to light, the
infant lies without any strength; soon, like a quadruped,
it uses its limbs after the manner of the brutes; and by degrees it
stands upright, shaking, and with knees still unsteady, the sinews being
supported by some assistance. Then he becomes strong and swift, and
passes over the hours of youth; and the years of middle age, too, now
past, he glides adown the steep path of declining age. This undermines
and destroys the robustness of former years; and Milo, 13 now grown old, weeps 525 xv. 229-264. when he sees the arms, which equalled those of Hercules in the
massiveness of the solid muscles, hang weak and exhausted. The daughter
of Tyndarus weeps, too, as she beholds in her mirror the wrinkles of old
age, and enquires of herself why it is that she was twice ravished.
Thou, Time, the consumer of all things, and thou, hateful Old
Age, together destroy all things; and, by degrees ye consume each
thing, decayed by the teeth of age, with a slow death. “These things too, which we call elements, are not of unchanging
duration; pay attention, and I will teach you what changes they
undergo. “The everlasting universe contains four elementary bodies. Two of
these, namely , earth and water, are heavy, and are borne
downwards by their weight; and as many are devoid of weight, and air,
and fire still purer than air, nothing pressing them, seek the higher
regions. Although these are separated in space, yet all things are made
from them, and are resolved into them. Both the earth dissolving distils
into flowing water; the water, too, evaporating, departs in the breezes
and the air; its weight being removed again, the most subtle air shoots
upwards into the fires of the æther on high. Thence do they
return back again, and the same order is unravelled; for fire becoming
gross, passes into dense air; this changes into water, and earth
is formed of the water made dense. Nor does its own form remain to each;
and nature, the renewer of all things, re-forms one shape from
another. And, believe me, in this universe so vast, nothing perishes;
but it varies and changes its appearance; and to begin to be something
different from what it was before, is called being born; and to cease to
be the same thing, is to be said to die. Whereas, perhaps, those
things are transferred hither, and these things thither; yet, in the
whole, all things ever exist. “For my part, I cannot believe that anything lasts long under the
same form. ’Twas thus, ye ages, that ye came down to the iron from the
gold; ’tis thus, that thou hast so often changed the lot of various places. I have beheld that as sea, which once
had been the most solid earth. I have seen land made from the sea;
and far away from the ocean the sea-shells lay, 526 xv. 264-285. and old anchors were found there on the tops of the mountains.
That which was a plain, a current of water has made into a valley,
and by a flood the mountain has been levelled into a plain; the ground
that was swampy is parched with dry sand; and places which have endured
drought, are wet with standing pools. Here nature has opened fresh
springs, but there she has shut them up; and rivers have burst forth,
aroused by ancient earthquakes; or, vanishing, they have subsided. “Thus, after the Lycus 14 has been swallowed up by a chasm
in the earth, it burst forth far thence, and springs up afresh at
another mouth. Thus the great Erasinus 15 is at one time swallowed up,
and then flowing with its stream concealed, is cast up again on the
Argive plains. They say, too, that the Mysus, tired of its spring and of
its former banks, now flows in another direction, as the Caicus.
The Amenanus, 16 too, at one time flows, rolling along the Sicilian
sands, and at another is dry, its springs being stopped up.
Formerly, the water of the Anigros 17 was used for
drinking; it now pours out water which you would decline to touch;
since, (unless all credit must be denied to the poets), the Centaurs , the double-limbed mortals, there washed the wounds
which the bow of the club-bearing Hercules had made. And what besides?
Does not the Hypanis 18 too, which before was sweet, rising from the
Scythian mountains, become impregnated 527 xv. 285-303. with bitter salts? Antissa, 19 Pharos, 20 and Phœnician
Tyre, 21 were once surrounded by waves; no one of these is
now an island. The ancient inhabitants had Leucas 22 annexed to the
continent; now the sea surrounds it. Zancle, 23 too, is said to
have been united to Italy, until the sea cut off the neighbouring
region, and repelled the land with its waves flowing between. “Should you seek Helice and Buris, 24 cities of Achaia, you will
find them beneath the waves, and the sailors are still wont to point out these levelled towns, with their walls buried under water. “There is a high hill near Trœzen of Pittheus, without any trees,
once a very level surface of a plain, but now a hill; for
(frightful to tell) the raging power 25 of the winds, pent up in dark
caverns, desiring to find some vent and having long struggled in vain to
enjoy a freer air, as there was no opening in all their prison and it
was not pervious to their blasts, swelled out the 528 xv. 303-319. extended earth, just as the breath of the mouth is wont to inflate a
bladder, or the hide 26 stripped from the two-horned goat. That
swelling remained on the spot, and still preserves the appearance
of a high hill, and has grown hard in length of time. Though many other instances may occur, either heard of by, or known to, yourselves, yet I will mention a few more. And besides, does not water, as
well, both produce and receive new forms? In the middle of the day, thy
waters, horned Ammon, 27 are frozen, at the rising and at the setting of the sun they are warm. On applying its waters, Athamanis 28 is said to kindle wood when the waning moon has
shrunk into her smallest orb. The Ciconians have a river, 29 which
when drunk of, turns the entrails into stone, and lays a covering of marble on things that are touched by it. The
Crathis 30 and the Sybaris adjacent to it, in our own country,
make the hair similar in hue to amber and gold. “And, what is still more wonderful, there are some streams which are
able to change, not only bodies, but even the mind. By whom has not
Salmacis, 31 with its obscene waters, been 529 xv. 319-337. heard of? Who has not heard , too, of that lake of Æthiopia, 32 of which, if any body drinks with his mouth, he
either becomes mad, or falls into a sleep wondrous for its heaviness?
Whoever quenches his thirst from the Clitorian spring 33 hates wine,
and in his sobriety takes pleasure in pure water. Whether it is that
there is a virtue in the water, the opposite of heating wine, or
whether, as the natives tell us, after the son of Amithaon, 34 by
his charms and his herbs, had delivered the raving daughters of Prœtus
from the Furies, he threw the medicines for the mind in that stream; and
a hatred of wine remained in those waters. “The river Lyncestis 35 flows unlike that stream in
its effect; for as soon as any one has drunk of it with immoderate
throat, he reels, just as if he had been drinking unmixed wine. There is
a place in Arcadia, (the ancients called it Pheneos,) 36 suspicious
for the twofold nature of its water. Stand in dread of it at night; if
drunk of in the night time, it is injurious; in the daytime, it is drunk
of without any ill effects. So lakes and rivers have, some, one
property, and some another. There was a time when Ortygia 37 was
floating on the waves, 530 xv. 337-366. now it is fixed. The Argo dreaded the Symplegades tossed by the assaults
of the waves dashing against them; they now stand immoveable, and resist the attacks of the winds. “Nor will Ætna, which burns with its sulphureous furnaces, always be
a fiery mountain ; nor yet was it always fiery. For, if the earth
is an animal, and is alive, and has lungs that breathe forth flames in
many a place, it may change the passages for its breathing, and oft as
it is moved, may close these caverns and open others; or if the
light winds are shut up in its lowermost caverns, and strike rocks
against rocks, and matter that contains the elements of flame, and it takes fire at the concussion, the winds once calmed, the caverns will become cool; or, if the bituminous qualities
take fire, or yellow sulphur is being dried up with a smouldering smoke,
still, when the earth shall no longer give food and unctuous fuel to the
flame, its energies being exhausted in length of time, and when
nutriment shall be wanting to its devouring nature, it will not be
able to endure hunger, and left destitute, it will desert its
flames. “The story is, that in the far Northern Pallene 38 there are
persons, who are wont to have their bodies covered with light feathers,
when they have nine times entered the Tritonian lake. For my part I do
not believe it; but the Scythian women, as well, having their
limbs sprinkled with poison, are said to employ the same arts. But if we
are to give any credit 39 to things proved by experience , do you
not see that whatever bodies are consumed by length of time, or by
dissolving heat, are changed into small animals? Come too, bury some
choice bullocks just slain, it is a thing well ascertained by
experience, that flower-gathering bees are produced 531 xv. 366-389. promiscuously from the putrefying entrails. These, after the manner of
their producers, inhabit the fields, delight in toil, and labour in
hope. The warlike steed, 40 buried in the ground, is the
source of the hornet. If you take off the bending claws from the crab of
the sea-shore, and bury the rest in the earth, a scorpion
will come forth from the part so buried, and will threaten with
its crooked tail. “The silkworms, too, that are wont to cover the leaves with their
white threads, a thing observable by husbandmen, change their forms
into that of the deadly moth. 41 Mud contains seed that generate
green frogs; and it produces them deprived of feet; 42 soon it gives
them legs adapted for swimming; and that the same may be fitted for long
leaps, the length of the hinder ones exceeds that of the fore
legs. And it is not a cub 43 which the bear produces at the
moment of birth, but a mass of flesh hardly alive. By licking, the
mother forms it into limbs, and brings it into a shape, such as she
herself has. Do you not see, that the offspring of the honey bees, which
the hexagonal cell conceals, are produced without limbs, and that they
assume both feet and wings only after a time. Unless he knew it
was the case, could any one suppose it possible that the bird of Juno,
which carries stars on its tail, and the eagle , the armour-bearer
of Jove, and the doves of Cytherea, and all the race of birds, are
produced from the middle portion of an egg? There are 532 xv. 389-414. some who believe that human marrow changes into a serpent, 44 when
the spine has putrefied in the enclosed sepulchre. “But these which I have named derive their origin from other
particulars; there is one bird which renews and reproduces itself. The
Assyrians call it the Phœnix. It lives not on corn or grass, but on
drops of frankincense, and the juices of the amomum. This bird ,
when it has completed the five ages of its life, with its talons and its
crooked beak constructs for itself a nest in the branches of a holm-oak,
or on the top of a quivering palm. As soon as it has strewed in this
cassia and ears of sweet spikenard and bruised cinnamon with yellow
myrrh, it lays itself down on it, and finishes its life in the midst of
odours. They say that thence, from the body of its parent, is reproduced
a little Phœnix, which is destined to live as many years. When time has
given it strength, and it is able to bear the weight, it lightens the
branches of the lofty tree of the burden of the nest, and dutifully
carries both its own cradle and the sepulchre of its parent; and, having
reached the city of Hyperion through the yielding air, it lays it down
before the sacred doors in the temple of Hyperion. “And if there is any wondrous novelty in these things, still
more may we be surprised that the hyæna changes its sex, 45 and
that the one which has just now, as a female, submitted to the embrace
of the male, is now become a male itself. That animal, too, which feeds
upon 46 the winds and the air, immediately assumes, from its
contact, any colour whatever. Conquered India presented her lynxes to
Bacchus crowned with clusters; and , as they tell, whatever the
bladder of these discharges 533 xv. 414-444. is changed into stone, 47 and hardens by contact with the air. So
coral, too, as soon as it has come up to the air becomes hard; beneath
the waves it was a soft plant. 48 “The day will fail me, and Phœbus
will bathe his panting steeds in the deep sea, before I can embrace in
my discourse all things that are changed into new forms. So in lapse of
time, we see nations change, and these gaining strength, while those are falling. So Troy was great, both in her riches and her men,
and for ten years could afford so much blood; whereas , now laid
low, she only shows her ancient ruins, and, instead of her wealth, she points at the tombs of her ancestors. Sparta was famed; 49 great Mycenæ flourished; so, too, the citadel of
Cecrops, and that of Amphion. Now Sparta is a contemptible spot;
lofty Mycenæ is laid low. What now is Thebes, the city of Œdipus, but a mere story? What remains of Athens, the city of Pandion, but its
name? “Now, too, there is a report that Dardanian Rome is rising; which,
close to the waters of Tiber that rises in the Apennines, is laying the
foundations of her greatness beneath a vast structure. She then, in her
growth, is changing her form, and will one day be the mistress of the
boundless earth. So they say that the soothsayers, and the oracles,
revealers of destiny, declare; and, so far as I recollect, Helenus, the
son of Priam, said to Æneas, as he was lamenting, and in doubt as to his
safety, when now the Trojan state was sinking, ‘Son of a Goddess,
if thou dost thyself well understand the presentiment of my mind, Troy
shall not, thou being preserved, entirely fall. The flames and the sword
shall afford thee a passage. Thou shalt go, and, together with thee,
thou shalt bear ruined Pergamus; until a foreign soil, more friendly
than thy native land, shall be the lot of Troy and thyself. Even now do
I see that our Phrygian 534 xv. 444-475. posterity are destined to build a city, so great as neither now
exists, nor will exist, nor has been seen in former times. Through a
long lapse of ages, other distinguished men shall make it powerful, but
one born 50 of the blood of Iülus shall make it the mistress of
the world. After the earth shall have enjoyed his presence, the æthereal
abodes shall gain him, and heaven shall be his destination.’ Remembering
it, I call to mind that Helenus prophesied this to Æneas, who bore
the Penates from Troy ; and I rejoice that my kindred walls are
rising apace, and that to such good purpose for the Phrygians the
Pelasgians conquered. “But that we may not range afar with steeds that forget to hasten to
the goal; the heavens, and whatever there is beneath them, and the
earth, and whatever is upon it, change their form. We too, who
are a portion of the universe, (since we are not only bodies, but
are fleeting souls as well, and can enter into beasts as our abode, and be hidden within the breasts of the cattle), should allow
those bodies which may contain the souls of our parents, or of our
brothers, or of those allied with us by some tie, or of men at all
events, to be safe and unmolested; and we ought not to fill 51 our
entrails with victuals fit for Thyestes. How greatly he disgraces
himself, how in his impiety does he prepare himself for shedding human
blood, who cuts the throat of the calf with the knife, and gives a deaf
ear to its lowings! or who can kill the kid as it sends forth cries like
those of a child; or who can feed upon the bird to which he himself has
given food. How much is there wanting in these instances for downright
criminality? A short step only is there thence to
it ! “Let the bull plough, or let it owe its death to aged years; let the
sheep furnish us a defence against the shivering Boreas; let the
well-fed she-goats afford their udders to be pressed by the hand. Away
with your nets, and your springes and snares and treacherous
contrivances; deceive not the bird with the bird-limed twig; deceive not
the deer with the dreaded feather 535 xv. 475-478. foils; 52 and do not conceal the barbed hooks in the deceitful
bait. If A any thing is noxious, destroy it, but even then only
destroy it. Let your appetites abstain from it for food, and let them
consume a more befitting sustenance.” EXPLANATION. The Poet having now exhausted nearly all the transformations which
ancient history afforded him, proceeds to enlist in the number some of
the real phenomena of nature, together with some imaginary ones. As
Pythagoras was considered to have pursued metaphysical studies more
deeply, perhaps, than any other of the ancient philosophers, Ovid could
not have introduced a personage more fitted to discuss these subjects.
Having travelled through Asia, it is supposed that Pythagoras passed
into Italy, and settled at Crotona, to promulgate there the
philosophical principles which he had acquired in his travels through
Egypt and Asia Minor. The Pythagorean philosophy was well-suited for the purpose of mingling
its doctrines with the fabulous narratives of the Poet, as it consisted,
in great part, of the doctrine of an endless series of transformations.
Its main features may be reduced to two general heads; the first of
which was the doctrine of the Metempsychosis, or continual
transmigration of souls from one body into another. Pythagoras is
supposed not to have originated this doctrine, but to have received it
from the Egyptians, by whose priesthood there is little doubt that it
was generally promulgated. Some writers have suggested that this
transmigration was only taught by Pythagoras in a metaphorical sense;
as, for instance, when he said that the souls of men were transferred to
beasts, it was only to teach us that irregular passions render us
brutes; on examination, however, we shall find that there is no ground
to doubt that he intended his doctrines to be understood according to
the literal meaning of his words; indeed, the more strongly to enforce
his doctrine by a personal illustration, he was in the habit of
promulgating that he remembered to have been Euphorbus, at the time of
the siege of Troy, and that his soul, after several other
transmigrations, had at last entered the body which it then inhabited,
under the name of Pythagoras. In consequence of this doctrine, it was a
favourite tenet of his followers to abstain from eating the flesh of
animals, for fear of unconsciously devouring some friend or kinsman. The second feature of this philosophy consisted in the elucidation of
the changes that happen in the physical world, a long series of
which is here set forth by the Poet; truth being mingled at random with
fiction. While some of his facts are based upon truth, others seem to
have only emanated from the fertile invention of the travellers of those
days; of the latter kind are the stories of the river of Thrace, whose
waters petrified those who drank of it; the fountains that kindled wood,
that caused a change of sex, that created an aversion to wine, that
transformed men into birds, and fables of a similar nature; such, too,
are those stories which were generally believed by even the educated men
of antiquity, 536 xv. 478-499. but which the wisdom of modern times has long since shown to be utterly
baseless, as, for instance, that bees grew from the entrails of the ox,
and hornets from those of the horse. The principle of Pythagoras, that
everything is continually changing and that nothing perishes, is true to
a certain extent; but in his times, and even in those of Ovid,
philosophy was not sufficiently advanced to speak with precision on the
subject, and to discover the true boundary between truth and
fiction. FABLES IV. V. AND VI. Egeria , the wife of Numa, is
inconsolable after his death, and is changed into a fountain. The horses
of Hippolytus being frightened by a sea-monster, he is killed by being
thrown from his chariot, and becomes a God, under the name of Virbius.
Tages, the Diviner, arises out of a clod of earth. The lance of Romulus
is changed into a cornel-tree. Cippus becomes horned, and goes into
voluntary banishment, rather than his country should be deprived of its
liberty by his means. With his mind cultivated with precepts such as these and others, they
say that Numa returned to his country, and, being voluntarily invited, 53 received the sovereignty of the Roman people. Blest
with a Nymph for his wife, and the Muses for his guides, he taught the
rites of sacrifice, and brought over to the arts of peace a race inured
to savage warfare. After, full of years, he had finished his reign and
his life, the Latian matrons and the people and the Senators lamented
Numa at his death. But his wife, leaving the city, lay hid, concealed in
the thick groves of the valley of Aricia, and by her groans and
lamentations disturbed the sacred rites of Diana, brought thither by
Orestes. Ah! how oft did the Nymphs of the grove and of the lake entreat
her not to do so, and utter soothing words. Ah! how often did the hero,
the son of Theseus, say to her as she wept, “Put an end to it; for thy
lot is not the only one to be lamented. Consider the like calamities of
others, thou wilt then bear thine own better. And would that an
example, not my own, could lighten thy grief! yet even my own can
do so.” “I suppose, in discourse it has reached thy ears that a certain
Hippolytus met with his death through the credulity of his father, by
the deceit of his wicked step-mother. Thou wilt 537 xv. 499-531. wonder, and I shall hardly be able to prove it; but yet I am he. In
former times, the daughter of Pasiphaë, having tempted me in vain,
pretended that I wished to defile the couch of my father, a thing
that she herself wished to do; and having turned the accusation against me , (whether it was more through dread of discovery, or
through mortification at her repulse) she charged me. And my father
expelled me, thus innocent, from the city, and as I went he
uttered imprecations against my head, with ruthless prayers. I was
going to Trœzen, the city of Pittheus, 54 in my flying
chariot, and I was now proceeding along the shores of the Corinthian
gulf, when the sea was aroused, and an enormous mass of waters seemed to
bend and to grow in the form of a mountain, and to send forth a roaring
noise, and to burst asunder at its very summit. Thence, the waves being
divided, a horned bull was sent forth, and erect in the light air
as far as his breast, he vomited forth a quantity of sea-water from his
nostrils and his open mouth. The hearts of my attendants quailed; my
mind remained without fear, intent only on my exile, when the
fierce horses turned their necks towards the sea, and were terrified,
with ears erect; and they were alarmed with dread of the monster, and
precipitated the chariot over the lofty rocks. I struggled, with
unavailing hand, to guide the bridle covered with white foam, and,
throwing myself backwards, I pulled back the loosened reins. And,
indeed, the madness of my steeds would not have exceeded that strength of mine , had not the wheel, by running against a stump, been
broken and disjoined just where it turns round on the long
axle-tree. “I was hurled from my chariot; and, the reins entwined around my
limbs, you might have seen my palpitating entrails dragged, my sinews
fasten upon the stump, my limbs partly torn to pieces and partly left
behind, being caught by various obstacles , my bones in their
breaking emit a loud noise, and my exhausted breath become exhaled, and
not a part in my body which you could recognize; and the whole of me formed but one continued wound. And canst thou,
Nymph, or dost thou venture to compare thy misfortune to mine?
I have visited, too, the realms deprived of light, and I have
bathed my lacerated body in 538 xv. 531-561. the waves of Phlegethon. 55 Nor could life have been restored
me, but through the powerful remedies of the son of Apollo. After I had
received it, through potent herbs and the Pæonian aid, 56 much
against the will of Pluto, then Cynthia threw around me thick clouds,
that I might not, by my presence, increase his anger at this favour; and
that I might be safe, and be seen in security, she gave me a more aged appearance, and left me no features that could be recognized. For a
long time she was doubtful whether she should give me Crete or Delos for
me to possess. Delos and Crete being abandoned, she placed me here, and,
at the same time, she ordered me to lay aside my name, which might have
reminded me of my steeds, and she said, ‘Thou, the same who wast
Hippolytus, be thou now Virbius.’ 57 From that time I have inhabited
this grove; and, as one of the lower Gods, I lie concealed under
the protection of my mistress, and to her am I devoted.” 58 But yet the misfortunes of others were not able to alleviate the
grief of Egeria; and, throwing herself down at the base of the hill, she
dissolved into tears; until, moved by her affection as she grieved, the
sister of Phœbus formed a cool fountain from her body, and dissolved her
limbs in ever-flowing waters. But this new circumstance surprised the Nymphs; and the son of the
Amazon 59 was astonished, in no other manner than as when the
Etrurian ploughman beheld the fate-revealing clod in the midst of the
fields move at first of its own accord and no one touching it, and
afterwards assume a human form, and lose that of earth, and open
its new-made mouth with the decrees of future destiny. The
natives called him Tages. He was the first to teach the Etrurian nation
to foretell future events. Or, as when Romulus once saw his lance, fixed in the 539 xv. 561-598. Palatine hill, suddenly shoot forth; which now stood there with a
root newly-formed, and not with the iron point driven in;
and, now no longer as a dart, but as a tree with limber twigs, it sent
forth, for the admiring spectators , a shade that was not
looked for. Or, as when Cippus beheld his horns in the water of the
stream, (for he did see them) and, believing that there was a false
representation in the reflection, often returning his fingers to his
forehead, he touched what he saw. And now, no longer condemning
his own eyesight, he stood still, as he was returning victorious from
the conquest of the enemy; and raising his eyes towards heaven, and his
hands in the same direction, he exclaimed, “Ye Gods above! whatever is
portended by this prodigy, if it is auspicious, then be it auspicious to
my country and to the people of Quirinus; but if unfortunate, be it so for myself.” And then he made atonement at the grassy
altars built of green turf, with odoriferous fires, and presented wine
in bowls, and consulted the panting entrails of slaughtered sheep what
the meaning of it was. Soon as the soothsayer of the Etrurian nation had
inspected them, he beheld in them the great beginnings of future events, but still not clearly. But when he raised his searching eyes
from the entrails of the sheep, to the horns of Cippus, he said, “Hail,
O king! for thee, Cippus, thee and thy horns shall this place and
the Latian towers obey. Only do thou lay aside all delay; hasten to
enter the gates wide open; thus the fates command thee. For, once received within the City, thou shalt be king, and thou shalt safely
enjoy a lasting sceptre.” He retreated backwards, and turning his stern
visage away from the walls of the City, he exclaimed, “Far, O far
away may the Gods drive such omens! Much more righteously shall I pass
my life in exile, than if the Capitol were to see me a king.” Thus he says; and forthwith he convokes the people and the
dignified Senate; but first, he veils his horns with laurel that
betokens peace, and he stands upon a mound raised by his brave soldiers;
and praying to the Gods after the ancient manner, “Behold!” says he,
“one is here who will be king, if you do not expel him from the City.
I will tell you who he is by a sign, and not by name. He
wears horns on his forehead; the augur predicts to you, that if he
enters the City, he shall give you laws as his slaves. He, indeed, was
able to 540 xv. 598-621. enter the open gates, but I have opposed him; although no one is more
nearly allied with him than myself. Forbid your City to this man, ye
Romans, or, if he shall deserve it, bind him with heavy fetters; or else
end your fears by the death of the destined tyrant.” As the murmur which arises among the groves of the slender pine, 60 when the furious East wind whistles among them, or
as that which the waves of the ocean produce, if any one hears them from
afar, such is the noise of the crowd. But yet amid the confused words of
the shouting multitude, one cry is distinguished, “Which is he?” And
then they examine the foreheads, and seek the predicted horns. Cippus
again addresses them: “Him whom you require, ye now have;” and,
despite of the people, throwing the chaplet from his head, he exhibits
his temples, remarkable for two horns. All cast down their eyes, and
utter groans, and (who would have supposed it?) they unwillingly look
upon that head famed for its merits. And no longer suffering it to be
deprived of its honours, they place upon it the festive chaplet. But the
nobles, Cippus, since thou art forbidden to enter the city, give thee as
much land, as a mark of honour, as thou canst, with the oxen yoked to
the pressed plough, make the circuit of from the rising of the sun to
its setting. They carve, too, the horns, imitating their wondrous form,
on the door-posts adorned with brass, there to remain for long
ages. EXPLANATION. Ovid, following the notion that was generally entertained of the wisdom
of Numa, pretends that before he was elected to the sovereignty he went
to Crotona, for the purpose of studying under Pythagoras; but he is
guilty of a considerable anachronism in this instance, as Pythagoras was
not born till very many years after the time of Numa. According to Livy,
Pythagoras flourished in the time of Servius Tullius, the sixth Roman
king, about one hundred and fifty years after Numa. Modern authors are
of opinion that upwards of two hundred years intervened between the days
of Numa and Pythagoras. Besides, Dionysius of Halicarnassus distinctly
asserts that the city of Crotona was only built in the fourth year of
the reign of Numa Pompilius. Numa is said to have been in the habit of retiring to the Arician grove,
to consult the Nymph Egeria upon the laws which he was about to
promulgate for the benefit of his subjects. It is probable, that to
ensure 541 their observance the more effectually, he wished the people to believe
that his enactments were compiled under the inspection of one who
partook of the immortal nature, and that in so doing he followed the
example of previous lawgivers. Zamolxis pretended that the laws which he
gave to the Scythians were dictated to him by his attendant genius or
spirit. The first Minos affirmed that Jupiter was the author of the
ordinances which he gave to the people of Crete, while Lycurgus
attributed his to Apollo. It is not improbable that in this they
imitated the example of Moses, a tradition of whose reception of
the laws on Mount Sinai they may have received from the people of
Phœnicia. Dionysius of Halicarnassus has an interesting passage relative to Numa,
which throws some light upon his alleged intercourse with the Nymph
Egeria. His words are— ‘The Romans affirm that Numa was never
engaged in any warlike expedition; but that he passed his whole reign in
profound peace: that his first care was to encourage piety and justice
in his dominions, and to civilize his people by good and wholesome laws.
His profound skill in governing made him pass for being inspired, and
gave rise to many fabulous stories. Some have said that he had secret
interviews with the Nymph Egeria; others, that he frequently consulted
one of the Muses, and was instructed by her in the art of government.
Numa was desirous to confirm the people in this opinion; but because
some hesitated to believe his bare affirmation, and others went so far
as to call his alleged converse with the Deities a fiction, he took an
opportunity to give them such proofs of it, that the most sceptical
among them should have no room left for suspicion. This he effected in
the following manner. He one day invited several of the nobles to his
palace, and showed them the plainness of the apartments, where no rich
furniture was to be seen, nor any thing like an attempt at splendour;
and how even the most ordinary necessaries were wanting for anything
like a great entertainment; after which, he dismissed them with an
invitation to come to sup with him on the same night. At the appointed
hour his guests arrived; they were received on stately couches; the
tables were decked with a variety of plate, and were loaded with the
most exquisite dainties. The guests were struck with the sumptuousness
and profusion of the entertainment, and considering how impossible it
was for any man to have made such preparations in so short a time, were
persuaded that his communication with heaven was not a fiction, and that
he must have had the aid of the celestial powers to do things of a
nature so extraordinary. ‘ But,’ as the same author says, ‘those who were not so ready at
adopting fabulous narratives as a part of history, say that it was the
policy of Numa which led him to feign a conversation with the Nymph
Egeria, to make his laws respected by his people, and that he thence
followed the example of the Greek sages, who adopted the same method of
enforcing the authority of their laws with the people.’ The Romans were so persuaded of the fact of Numa’s conferences with the
Nymph Egeria, that they went into the grove of Aricia to seek her; but
finding nothing but a fountain in the spot which he used to frequent,
they promulgated the story of the transformation of the Nymph. St.
Augustin, speaking on this subject, says that Numa made use 542 of the waters of that fountain in the divination which was performed by
the aid of water, and was called Hydromancy. Theseus having left Ariadne in the isle of Naxos, flattered himself with
the hopes of marrying her sister Phædra. Deucalion, succeeding Minos in
Crete immediately after his death, sent Phædra to Athens. On arriving
there, she fell in love with Hippolytus, the son of Theseus, who had
been brought up at Trœzen by Pittheus. As she did not dare to request of
Theseus that his son might be brought from the court of Pittheus, she
built a temple to Venus near Trœzen, that she might the more frequently
have the opportunity of seeing Hippolytus, and called it by the name of
Hippolyteum. According to Euripides, this youth was wise, chaste,
and an enemy to all voluptuousness. He spent his time in hunting and
chariot racing, with other exercises which formed the pursuits of youths
of high station. According to Plutarch, it was at the time when Theseus
was a prisoner in Epirus, that Phædra took the opportunity of disclosing
to Hippolytus the violence of her passion for him. Her declaration being
but ill received, she grew desperate on his refusal to comply with her
desires, and was about to commit self-destruction, when her nurse
suggested the necessity of revenging the virtuous disdain of the
youth. Theseus having been liberated by Hercules, Phædra, being fearful lest
the intrigue should come to his knowledge, hanged herself, having first
written a letter to inform him that she could not survive an attempt
which Hippolytus had made on her virtue. Plutarch, Servius and Hyginus,
following Euripides, give this account of her death. But Seneca, in his
Hippolytus, says that she only appeared before her husband in extreme
grief, holding a sword in her hand to signify the violence which
Hippolytus had offered her. On this, Theseus implored the assistance of
Neptune, who sent a monster out of the sea, to frighten his horses, as
he was driving along the sea-shore: on which, they took fright, and
throwing him from his chariot, he was killed. It has been suggested that
the true meaning of this is, that Theseus having ordered his son to come
and justify himself, he made so much haste that his horses ran away with
him; and his chariot being dashed over the rocks, he was killed. Seneca also differs from the other writers, in saying that Phædra did
not put herself to death till she had heard of the catastrophe of
Hippolytus, on which she stabbed herself. The people of Trœzen,
regretting his loss, decreed him divine honours, built a temple, and
appointed a priest to offer yearly sacrifices to him. Euripides says,
that the young women of Trœzen, when about to be married, cut off their
hair and carried it to the temple of Hippolytus. It was also promulgated
that the Gods had translated him to the heavens, where he was changed
into the Constellation, called by the Latins ‘Auriga,’ or ‘the
Charioteer.’ Later authors, whom Ovid here follows, added, that
Æsculapius restored him to life, and that he afterwards appeared in
Italy under the name of Virbius. This story was probably invented as a
source of profit by the priesthood, who were desirous to find some good
reason for introducing his worship into the Arician grove near Rome.
This story is mentioned by Apollodorus, who quotes the author of the
Naupactan verses in favour of it, and by the Scholiasts of Euripides and
Pindar. 543 The ancient Etrurians were great adepts in the art of divination; their
favourite method of exercising which was by the inspection of the
entrails of beasts, and the observation of the flight of birds; and from
them, as we learn from Cicero in his book on Divination, the system
spread over the whole of Italy. Tages is supposed to have been the first
who taught this art, and he wrote treatises upon it, which, according to
Plutarch, were quoted by ancient authors. It not being known whence he
came, or who were his parents, he was called, in the language of the
poets, a son of the earth. Ammianus Marcellinus speaks of him as
being said to have sprung out of the earth in Etruria. Ovid next makes a passing allusion to the spear of Romulus, which, when
thrown by him from the Mount Aventine towards the Capitol, sticking in
the ground was converted into a tree, which immediately put forth
leaves. This prodigy was taken for a presage of the future greatness of
Rome: and Plutarch, in his life of Romulus, says that so long as this
tree stood, the Republic flourished. It began to wither in the time of
the first civil war; and Julius Cæsar having afterwards ordered a
building to be erected near where it stood, the workmen cutting some of
its roots in sinking the foundations, it soon after died. It is hardly
probable that a cornel tree would stand in a thronged city for nearly
seven hundred years; and it is, therefore, most likely, that care was
taken to renovate it from time to time, by planting slips from the
former tree. The story of Genucius Cippus is one of those strange fables with which
the Roman history is diversified. Valerius Maximus gives the following
account of it. He says that Cippus, going one day out of Rome, suddenly
found that something which resembled horns was growing out of his
forehead. Surprised at an event so extraordinary, he consulted the
augurs, who said that he would be chosen king, if he ever entered the
city again. As the royal power was abhorred in Rome, he preferred a
voluntary banishment to revisiting Rome on those terms. Struck with this
heroism, the Romans erected a brazen statue with horns over the gate by
which he departed, and it was afterwards called ‘Porta raudusculana,’
because the ancient Latin name of brass was ‘raudus,’ ‘rodus,’ or
‘rudus.’ The fact is, however, as Ovid represents it, that Cippus was
not going out of Rome, but returning to it, when the prodigy happened;
he having been to convey assistance to the Consul Valerius. The Senate
also conferred certain lands on Cippus, as a reward for his patriotism.
He lived about two hundred and forty years before the Christian era.
Pliny the Elder considers the story of the horns of Cippus as much a
fable as that of Actæon. It appears, however, that the account of the
horns may have possibly been founded on fact, as excrescences resembling
them have appeared on the bodies of individuals. Bayle makes mention of
a girl of Palermo, who had little horns all over her body, like those of
a young calf. In the Ashmolean museum at Oxford, a substance much
resembling the horn of a goat is shown, which is said to have sprung
from the forehead of a female named Mary Davis, whose likeness is there
shown. The excrescence was most probably produced by a deranged
secretion of the hair, and something of a similar nature may perhaps
have befallen Genucius Cippus, which, of course, would be made the 544 xv. 622-641. most of in those ages of superstition. Valerius Maximus, with all his
credulity, does not say that they were real horns that made their
appearance, but that they were ‘just like horns.’ It is not improbable that the story originally was, that Cippus, on his
return to Rome, dreamt that he had horns on his head, and that having
consulted the augurs, and received the answer mentioned by Ovid, he
preferred to suffer exile, rather than enslave his country; and that, in
length of time, the more wonderful part of the story was added
to it. FABLE VII. Rome being wasted by a pestilence, the
Delphian oracle is consulted; and the answer is given, that to cause it
to cease Æsculapius must be brought to Rome. On this, ambassadors are
sent to Epidaurus to demand the God. The people refuse to part with him;
but he appears to one of the Romans in a dream, and consents to go. On
his arrival at Rome the contagion ceases, and a Temple is built in his
honour. Relate, now, ye Muses, the guardian Deities of poets (for you know,
and remote antiquity conceals it not from you), whence it is that the Island surrounded by the channel of the Tiber introduced the son of
Coronis into the sacred rites of the City of Romulus. A dire
contagion had once infected the Latian air, and the pale bodies were
deformed by a consumption that dried up the blood. When, wearied with so many deaths, they found that mortal endeavours availed
nothing, and that the skill of physicians had no effect, they sought the
aid of heaven, and they repaired to Delphi which occupies the centre
spot of the world, the oracle of Phœbus, and entreated that he would aid
their distressed circumstances by a response productive of health, and
put an end to the woes of a City so great. Both the spot, and the
laurels, and the quivers which it has, shook at the same moment, and the
tripod 61 gave this answer from the recesses of the shrine,
and struck with awe their astonished breasts:— “What here
thou dost seek, O Roman, thou mightst have sought in a nearer spot:
and now seek it in a nearer spot; thou hast no need of Apollo to
diminish thy grief, but of the son of Apollo. Go with a good omen, and
invite my son.” After the prudent Senate had received the commands of the 545 xv. 641-677. Deity, they enquired what city the youthful son of Phœbus inhabited; and
they sent some to reach the coasts of Epidaurus 62 with the winds.
Soon as those sent had reached them in the curving ship, they repaired
to the council and the Grecian elders, and besought them to grant them
the Divinity, who by his presence could put an end to the mortality of
the Ausonian nation; for that so the unerring response had
directed. Their opinions were divided, and differed; and some thought
that aid ought not to be refused. Many refused it, and advised them not
to part with their own protector, and to give up their own guardian
Deity. While they were deliberating, twilight had now expelled
the waning day, and the shadow of the earth had brought darkness over
the world; when, in thy sleep, the saving God seemed, O Roman, to
be standing before thy couch; but just as he is wont to be in his
temple; and, holding a rustic staff in his left hand, he seemed to be stroking the long hair of his beard with his right, and to utter
such words as these from his kindly breast— “Lay aside thy fears;
I will come, and I will leave these my statues. Only observe now this serpent, which with its folds entwines around this
staff, and accurately mark it with thine eyes, that thou mayst be able
to know it again. Into this shall I be changed; but I shall be greater,
and I shall appear to be of a size as great as that into which heavenly
bodies ought to be transformed.” Forthwith, with these words, the God departs; and with his
words and the God sleep departs , and genial light follows upon
the departure of sleep. The following morn has now dispersed the
starry fires; uncertain what to do, the nobles meet together in the
sumptuous temple of the God then sought, and beseech him to
indicate, by celestial tokens, in what spot he would wish to abide.
Hardly have they well ceased, when the God, all glittering with gold, in the form of a serpent, with crest erect, sends forth a hissing,
as a notice of his approach; and in his coming, he shakes both his
statue, the altars, the doors, the marble pavement, and the gilded roof,
and as far as the breast he stands erect in the midst of the temple, and
rolls around his eyes that sparkle with fire. The frightened multitude
is alarmed; the priest, having his chaste hair bound with a white
fillet, recognizes the Deity and exclaims, “The God! 546 xv. 677-706. Behold the God! Whoever you are that are present, be of good omen, both
with your words and your feelings. Mayst thou, most beauteous one, be
beheld to our advantage; and mayst thou aid the nations that perform thy
sacred rites.” Whoever are present, adore the Deity as bidden; and all
repeat the words of the priest over again; and the descendants of Æneas
give a pious omen, both with their feelings, and in their words. To
these the God shows favour; and with crest erected, he gives a hiss,
a sure token, repeated thrice with his vibrating tongue. Then he
glides down the polished steps, 63 and turns back his head, and,
about to depart, he looks back upon his ancient altars, and salutes his
wonted abode and the temple that so long he has inhabited. Then,
with his vast bulk, he glides along the ground covered with the strewn
flowers, and coils his folds, and through the midst of the city repairs
to the harbour protected by its winding quay. Here he stops; and seeming to dismiss his train, and the dutiful
attendance of the accompanying crowd, with a placid countenance, he
places his body in the Ausonian ship. It is sensible of the weight of
the God; and the ship now laden with the Divinity for its
freight, the descendants of Æneas rejoice; and a bull having first been
slain on the sea-shore, they loosen the twisted cables of the bark
bedecked with garlands. A gentle breeze has now impelled the
ship. The God is conspicuous aloft, 64 and pressing upon the crooked
stern with his neck laid upon it, he looks down upon the azure waters;
and with the gentle Zephyrs along the Ionian sea, on the sixth rising of
the daughter of Pallas, he makes Italy, and is borne along the Lacinian
shores, ennobled by the temple of the Goddess Juno , and the
Scylacean 65 coasts. He leaves Iapygia behind, and flies from the
Amphissian 66 rocks with the oars on the left side; on the right
side he passes by the steep Ceraunia, and Romechium, and Caulon, 67 and
Narycia, and he crosses 547 xv. 706-718. the sea and the straits of the Sicilian Pelorus, and the abodes of the
king the grandson of Hippotas, and the mines of Temesa; and then he
makes for Leucosia, 68 and the rose-beds of the warm Pæstum. Then he
coasts by Capreæ, 69 and the promontory of Minerva, and the hills
ennobled with the Surrentine 70 vines, and the city of Hercules, 71 and Stabiæ, 72 and Parthenope made for
retirement, and after it the temple of the Cumæan Sibyl. Next, the warm
springs 73 are passed by, and Linternum, 74 that bears mastick
trees; and then Vulturnus, 75 that carries much sand along with
its tide, and Sinuessa, that abounds with snow-white snakes, 76 and
the pestilential Minturnæ, 77 and she for whom 78 her
foster-child erected the tomb, and the abode of Antiphates, 79 and
Trachas, 80 surrounded by the marsh, and the land of Circe, and
Antium, 81 with its rocky coast. 548 xv. 719-744. After the sailors have steered the sail-bearing ship hither (for now
the sea is aroused), the Deity unfolds his coils, and gliding with many
a fold and in vast coils, he enters the temple of his parent, that
skirts the yellow shore. The sea now becalmed, the God of
Epidaurus leaves the altars of his sire; and having enjoyed the
hospitality of the Deity, thus related to him, he furrows the
sands of the sea-shore with the dragging of his rattling scales, and
reclining against the helm of the ship, he places his head upon the
lofty stern; until he comes to Castrum, 82 and the sacred
abodes of Lavinium, and the mouths of the Tiber. Hither, all the people
indiscriminately, a crowd both of matrons and of men, rush to meet
him; they, too, Vesta! who tend thy fires; and with joyous shouts they
welcome the God. And where the swift ship is steered through the tide
running out, altars being erected in a line, the frankincense crackles
along the banks on either side, and perfumes the air with its
smoke; the felled victim too, with its blood makes warm the
knives thrust into it . And now he has entered Rome, the sovereign of the world. The serpent
rises erect, and lifts his neck that reclines against the top of the
mast, and looks around for a habitation suited for himself. There is
a spot, where the river flowing around, is divided into two parts;
it is called “the Island.” The river in the direction of each
side extends its arms of equal length, the dry land lying in the
middle. Hither, the serpent, son of Phœbus, betakes himself from the
Latian ship; and he puts an end to the mourning, having resumed his
celestial form. And thus did he come, the restorer of health, to
the City. EXPLANATION. The story here narrated by Ovid is derived from the Roman history, to
which we will shortly refer for an explanation. Under the consulate of Quintus Fabius Gurges, and Decimus Junius Brutus
Scæva, Rome was ravaged by a frightful pestilence. The resources of
physic having been exhausted, the Sibylline books were consulted to
ascertain by what expedient the calamity might be put an end to, and
they found that the plague would not cease till they had brought
Æsculapius from Epidaurus to Rome. Being then engaged in war, they
postponed their application to the Epidaurians for a year, at the end of
which time they despatched an embassy to Epidaurus; on which a serpent
was delivered to them, which the priests of the Deity 549 xv. 745-762. assured them was the God himself. Taking it on board their ship, the
delegates set sail. When near Antium, they were obliged to put in there
by stress of weather, and the serpent, escaping from the ship, remained
three days on shore; after which it came on board of its own accord, and
they continued their voyage. On arriving at the Island of the Tiber the
serpent escaped, and concealed itself amid the reeds; and as they, in
their credulity, fancied that the God had chosen the place for his
habitation, they built a temple there in his honour. From this period,
which was about the year of Rome 462, the worship of Æsculapius was
introduced in the city, and to him recourse was had in cases of disease,
and especially in times of pestilence. FABLE VIII. Julius Cæsar is assassinated in the
Senate-house, and by the intercession of Venus, his ancestor, he is
changed into a star. The Poet concludes his work with a compliment to
Augustus, and a promise of immortality to himself. And still, he came a stranger to our temples; Cæsar is a Deity in his
own city; whom, alike distinguished both in war and peace, wars
ending with triumphs, his government at home, and the rapid glory of his
exploits, did not more tend to change into a new planet, and a
star with brilliant train, than did his own progeny. For of all the acts of Cæsar, there is not one more ennobling than that he was the
father of this our Cæsar . Was it, forsooth, a greater thing
to have conquered the Britons surrounded by the ocean, and to have
steered his victorious ships along the seven-mouthed streams of the Nile
that bears the papyrus, and to have added to the people of Quirinus the
rebellious Numidians 83 and the Cinyphian Juba, and Pontus 84 proud
of the fame of Mithridates, and to have deserved many a triumph, and to have enjoyed some, than it was to have been the father of
a personage so great, under whose tutelage over the world, you, ye Gods
above, have shewn excessive care for the human race? That he then might not be sprung from mortal seed, ’twas fit that Julius should be made a Divinity. When the resplendent mother of 550 xv. 762-798. Æneas was sensible of this; and when she saw that a sad death was
in preparation for the Pontiff, and that the arms of the conspirators
were brandished; she turned pale, and said to each of the Deities, as
she met them:— “Behold, on how vast a scale treason is plotted against me, and with
how great perfidy that life is sought, which alone remains for me from
the Dardanian Iülus. Shall I alone be everlastingly harassed by
justified anxieties? I, whom one while the Calydonian lance of the son
of Tydeus is wounding, and at another time the walls of Troy,
defended in vain, are grieving? I, who have seen my son driven about in
protracted wanderings, tossed on the ocean, entering the abodes of the
departed, and waging war with Turnus; or, if we confess the truth, with
Juno rather? But , why am I now calling to mind the ancient
misfortunes of my own offspring? Present apprehensions do not allow me
to remember things of former days. Against me, you behold how the
impious swords are now being whetted. Avert them, I entreat;
hinder this crime, and do not, by the murder of the priest, extinguish
the flames of Vesta.” Such expressions as these did Venus, full of anxiety, vainly let fall
throughout the heavens, and she moved the Gods above. Although they were
not able to frustrate the iron decrees of the aged sisters, yet they
afforded no unerring tokens of approaching woe. They say, that arms
resounding amid the black clouds, and dreadful blasts of the
trumpet, and clarions heard through the heavens, forewarned men of the
crime. The sad face too of the sun gave a livid light to the alarmed
earth. Often did torches seem to be burning in the midst of the stars;
often did drops of blood fall in the showers. The azure-coloured Lucifer
had his light tinted with a dark iron colour; the chariot of the moon
was besprinkled with blood. The Stygian owl gave omens of ill in a
thousand places; in a thousand places did the ivory statues shed tears;
dirges, too, are said to have been heard, and threatening expressions in
the sacred groves. No victim gave an omen of good; the entrails, too,
showed that great tumults were imminent; and the extremity of the
liver was found cut off among the entrails. They say, too, that in
the Forum, and around the houses and the temples of the Gods, the dogs
were howling by night; and that the ghosts of the departed were walking,
and that the City was 551 xv. 798-826. shaken by earthquakes. But still the warnings of the Gods could not
avert treachery and the approach of Fate, and drawn swords were carried
into a temple; and no other place in the whole City than the
Senate-house pleased them for this crime and this atrocious murder. But then did Cytherea beat her breast with both her hands, and
attempt to hide the descendant of Æneas in a cloud, in which, long
since, Paris was conveyed from the hostile son of Atreus, 85 and
Æneas had escaped from the sword of Diomedes. In such words as these did her father Jove address her : “Dost thou, my daughter,
unaided, attempt to change the insuperable decrees of Fate? Thou,
thyself, mayst enter the abode of the three sisters, and there
thou wilt behold the register of future events, wrought with vast labour, of brass and of solid iron; these, safe and destined
for eternity, fear neither the thundering shock of the heavens,
nor the rage of the lightnings, nor any source of destruction.
There wilt thou find the destinies of thy descendants engraved in
everlasting adamant. I myself have read them, and I have marked
them in my mind; I will repeat them, that thou mayst not still be
ignorant of the future. He (on whose account, Cytherea, thou art thus anxious), has completed his time, those years being ended
which he owed to the earth. Thou, with his son, who, as the heir to his
glory, will bear the burden of government devolving on him , wilt
cause him, as a Deity, to reach the heavens, and to be worshipped in
temples; and he, as a most valiant avenger of his murdered parent, will
have us to aid him in his battles. The conquered walls of Mutina, 86 besieged under his auspices, shall sue for peace;
Pharsalia shall be sensible of him, and Philippi, 87 again drenched
with Emathian gore; and the name of one renowned as Great, shall
be subdued in the Sicilian waves; the Egyptian dame too, the wife 88 of the Roman 552 xv. 826-858. general, shall fall, vainly trusting in that alliance; and in vain shall
she threaten, that our own Capitol shall be obedient to her Canopus. 89 Why should I recount to thee the regions of
barbarism, and nations situate in either ocean? Whatever the
habitable world contains, shall be his; the sea, too, shall be subject
to him. Peace being granted to the earth, he will turn his attention to
civil rights, and, as a most upright legislator, he will enact laws.
After his own example, too, will he regulate manners; and, looking
forward to the days of future time, and of his coming posterity, he will
order the offspring born of his hallowed wife 90 to assume both his
own name and his cares. Nor shall he, until as an aged man he shall have
equalled his glories with like years, 91 arrive at the
abodes of heaven and his kindred stars. Meanwhile, change this soul,
snatched from the murdered body, into a beam of light, that eternally
the Deified Julius may look down from his lofty abode upon our Capitol
and Forum.” Hardly had he uttered these words, when the genial Venus, perceived
by none, stood in the very midst of the Senate-house, and snatched the
soul, just liberated from the body , away from the limbs of her
own Cæsar, and, not suffering it to dissolve in air, she bore it amid
the stars of heaven. And as she bore it, she perceived it assume a train of light and become inflamed; and she dropped it from her
bosom. Above the moon it takes its flight, and, as a star, it glitters,
carrying a flaming train with a lengthened track; and, as he beholds the
illustrious deeds of his son, he confesses that they are superior to his
own, and rejoices that he is surpassed by him. Although Augustus forbids his own actions to be lauded before those of his father, still
Fame, in her freedom and subject to no commands, prefers him against his
will; and, in this one point, she disobeys him. Thus does Atreus
yield to the glories of the great Agamemnon; thus does Theseus excel
Ægeus, and thus Achilles Peleus. In fine, that I may use examples
that equal themselves, thus too, is Saturn inferior to 553 xv. 858-879. Jove. Jupiter rules the abodes of heaven and the realms of the threefold
world: 92 the earth is under Augustus: each of them is a
father and a ruler. Ye Gods, the companions of Æneas, 93 for whom
both the sword and the flames made a way; and you, ye native Deities,
and thou, Quirinus, the father of the City, and thou, Gradivus, the son
of the invincible Quirinus, and thou, Vesta, held sacred among the
Penates of Cæsar; and, with the Vesta of Cæsar, thou, Phœbus, enshrined
in thy abode, and thou, Jupiter, who aloft dost possess the Tarpeian
heights, and whatever other Deities it is lawful and righteous
for a Poet to invoke; late, I pray, may be that day, and protracted
beyond my life, on which the person of Augustus, leaving that world
which he rules, shall approach the heavens: and when gone, may he
propitiously listen to those who invoke him. And now I have completed a work, which neither the anger of Jove, nor
fire, nor steel, nor consuming time will be able to destroy! Let that
day, which has no power but over this body of mine , put an end to
the term of my uncertain life, when it will. Yet, in my better part,
I shall be raised immortal above the lofty stars, and indelible
shall be my name. And wherever the Roman power is extended throughout
the vanquished earth, I shall be read by the lips of nations, and
(if the presages of Poets have aught of truth) throughout all ages shall
I survive in fame. EXPLANATION. The Poet having fulfilled his promise, and having brought down his work
from the beginning of the world to his own times, concludes it with the
apotheosis of Julius Cæsar. He here takes an opportunity of
complimenting Augustus, as being more worthy of divine honours than even
his predecessor, while he promises him a long and glorious reign.
Augustus, however, had not to wait for death to receive divine honours,
as he enjoyed the glory of seeing himself worshipped as a Deity and
adored at altars erected to him, even in his lifetime. According to 554 Appian, he was but twenty-eight years of age when he was ranked among
the tutelar Divinities by all the cities of the empire. The Romans, who deduced their origin from Æneas, were flattered at the
idea of Venus interesting herself in behalf of her posterity, and
securing the honours of an apotheosis for Julius Cæsar. The historical
circumstances which Ovid here refers to were the following:—After
Julius Cæsar had been murdered in the Senate house, Augustus ordered
public games to be instituted in his honour. We learn from Suetonius,
that during their celebration a new star, or rather a comet, made its
appearance, on which it was promulgated that the soul of the deified
Julius had taken its place among the stars, and that Venus had procured
him that honour. It was then remembered, that the light of the Sun had
been unusually pallid the whole year following the death of Cæsar; this
which is generally supposed to have been caused by some spots which then
appeared on the disk of the sun, was ascribed to the grief of Apollo.
Various persons were found to assert various prodigies. Some said that
it had rained blood, others that the moon and stars had been obscured;
while others, still more imaginative, asserted that beasts had uttered
words, and that the dead had risen from their graves. The sorrow of the Gods and of nature at the untimely death of Julius
being thus manifested, Augustus proceeded to found a temple in his
honour, established priests for his service, and erected a statue of him
with a star on its forehead. He was afterwards represented in the
attitude of ascending to the heavens, and wielding a sceptre in his
hand. While flatterers complimented Augustus upon the care which he had
taken to enrol his predecessor among the Deities, there were some, the
poet Manilius being of the number, who considered that heaven was almost
over-peopled by him. Augustus, however, was not the sole author of the
story of the apotheosis of Julius Cæsar. The people had previously
attempted to deify him, though opposed by Cicero and Dolabella. In the
funeral oration which was delivered over Julius Cæsar by Antony, he
spoke of him as a God, and the populace, moved by his eloquence, and
struck at his blood-stained garments and his body covered with wounds,
were filled with indignation against the conspirators, and were about to
take the corpse to the Capitol, there to be buried; but the priests
would not permit it, and had it brought back to the Forum, where it was
burnt. Dio Cassius says, that the Roman people raised an altar on the
spot where the body had been burnt, and endeavoured to make libations
and to offer sacrifices there, as to a Divinity, but that the Consuls
overthrew the altar. Suetonius says, that a pillar was also erected to
him, of about twenty feet in height, with the inscription, ‘parenti
patriæ,’ ‘To the father of his country,’ and that for some time persons
resorted to that spot to offer sacrifices and to make vows. He adds,
that he was made a Divinity by a public decree, but he does not say at
what time. 1. Lacinian shores. ]—Ver. 13. Lacinium was a promontory of
Italy, not far from Crotona. 2. Distant Æsar. ]—Ver. 23. The Æsar was a little stream of
Calabria, which flowed into the sea, near the city of Crotona. 3. Son of Amphitryon. ]—Ver. 49. Hercules was the putative son
of Amphitryon, king of Thebes, who was the husband of his mother
Alcmena. 4. Tarentum. ]—Ver. 50. Tarentum was a famous city of Calabria,
said to have been founded by Taras, the son of Neptune. It was
afterwards enlarged by Phalanthus, a Lacedæmonian, whence its
present epithet. 5. Neæthus. ]—Ver. 51. This was a river of the Salentine
territory, near Crotona. 6. Thurium. ]—Ver. 52. Thurium was a city of Calabria, which
received its name from a fountain in its vicinity. It was also called
Thuria and Thurion. 7. Fields of Iapyx. ]—Ver. 52. Iapygia was a name which
Calabria received from Iapyx, the son of Dædalus. There was also a city
of Calabria, named Iapygia, and a promontory, called Iapygium. 8. And its rulers. ]—Ver. 61. Pythagoras is said to have fled
from the tyranny of Polycrates, the king of Samos. 9. No good adviser. ]—Ver. 103. Clarke translates ‘Non utilis
auctor ,’ ‘Some
good-for-nothing introducer.’ 10. The goat is led. ]—Ver 114. See the Fasti, Book I. l. 361. 11. Was Euphorbus. ]—Ver. 161. Diogenes Laërtius, in the life of
Pythagoras, says that Pythagoras affirmed, that he was, first,
Æthalides; secondly, Euphorbus, which he proved by recognizing his
shield hung up among the spoil in the temple of Juno, at Argos; next,
Hermotimus; then, Pyrrhus and fifthly, Pythagoras. 12. Flowing onward. ]—Ver. 178. ‘Cuncta fluunt’ is translated by
Clarke, ‘All things are in a flux.’ 13. Milo. ]—Ver. 229. Milo, of Crotona, was an athlete of such
stren[gth] that he was said to be able to kill a bull with a blow of his
fist, and [then] to carry it with ease on his shoulders, and afterwards
to devour it. [His] hands being caught within the portions of the trunk
of a tree, which he was trying to cleave asunder, he became a prey to
wild beasts. B 14. Lycus. ]—Ver. 273. There were several rivers of this name.
The one here referred to was also called by the name of Marsyas, and
flowed past the city of Laodicea, in Lydia. 15. Erasinus. ]—Ver. 276. This was a river of Arcadia, which
running out of the Stymphalian marsh, under the name of Stymphalus,
disappeared in the earth, and rose again in the Argive territory, under
the name of Erasinus. 16. Amenanus. ]—Ver. 279. This was a little river of Sicily,
rising in Mount Ætna, and falling into the sea near the city of
Catania. 17. Anigros. ]—Ver. 282. The Anigros, flowing from the mountain
of Lapitha, in Arcadia, had waters of a fetid smell, in which no fish
could exist. Pausanias thinks that this smell proceeded from the soil,
and not the water. He adds, that some said that Chiron, others that
Polenor, when wounded by the arrow of Hercules, washed the wound in the
water of this river, which became impure from its contact with the venom
of the Hydra . 18. Hypanis. ]—Ver. 285. Now the Bog. It falls into the Black
Sea. 19. Antissa. ]—Ver. 287. This island, in the Ægean Sea, was said
to have been formerly united to Lesbos. 20. Pharos. ]—Ver. 287. According to Herodotus, this island was
once a whole day’s sail from the main land of Egypt. In later times,
having been increased by the mud discharged by the Nile, it was united
to the shore by a bridge. 21. Tyre. ]—Ver. 288. Tyre once stood on an island, separated
from the shore by a strait, seven hundred paces in width. Alexander the
Great, when besieging it, united it to the main land by a causeway.
This, however, does not aid the argument of Pythagoras, who intends to
recount the changes wrought by nature, and not by the hand of man.
Besides, it is not easy to see how Pythagoras could refer to a fact
which took place several hundred years after his death. 22. Leucas. ]—Ver. 289. The island of Leucas was formerly a
peninsula, on the coast of Acarnania. 23. Zancle. ]—Ver. 290. Under this name he means the whole of
the isle of Sicily, which was supposed to have once joined the shores of
Italy. 24. Helice and Buris. ]—Ver. 293. We learn from Pliny the Elder
and Orosius, that Helice and Buris, cities of Achaia at the mouth of the
Corinthian gulf, were swallowed up by an earthquake, and that their
remains could be seen in the sea. A similar fate attended Port
Royal, in the island of Jamaica, in the year 1692. Its houses are said
to be still visible beneath the waves. 25. The raging power. ]—Ver. 299. Pausanias tells us, that in
the time of Antigonus, king of Macedonia, warm waters burst from the
earth, through the action of subterranean fires, near the city of
Trœzen. Perhaps the ‘tumulus’ here mentioned sprang up at the same
time. 26. Or the hide. ]—Ver. 305. He alludes to the goat-skins, which
formed the ‘utres,’ or leathern bottles, for wine and oil. 27. Horned Ammon. ]—Ver. 309. The lake of Ammon, in Libya, which
is here referred to, is thus described by Quintius Curtius (Book IV.
c. 7)— ‘There is also another grove at Ammon; in the middle
it contains a fountain, which they call ‘the water of the Sun.’ At
daybreak it is tepid; at mid-day, when the heat is intense, it is ice
cold. As the evening approaches, it grows warmer; at midnight, it boils
and bubbles; and as the morning approaches, its midnight heat goes off.’
Jupiter was worshipped in its vicinity, under the form of a ram. 28. Athamanis. ]—Ver. 311. This wonderful fountain was said to
be in Dodona, the grove sacred to Jupiter. 29. Have a river. ]—Ver. 313. Possibly the Hebrus is here meant.
The petrifying qualities of some streams is a fact well known to
naturalists. 30. The Crathis. ]—Ver. 315. Crathis and Sybaris were streams of
Calabria, flowing into the sea, near Crotona. Euripides and Strabo tell
the same story of the river Crathis. Pliny the Elder, in his
thirty-second Book, says— ‘Theophrastus tells us that Crathis,
a river of the Thurians, produces whiteness, whereas the Sybaris
causes blackness, in sheep and cattle. Men, too, are sensible of this
difference; for those who drink of the Sybaris, become more swarthy and
hardy, with the hair curling; while those who drink of the Crathis
become fairer, and more effeminate with the hair straight.’ 31. Salmacis. ]—Ver. 319. See Book IV. l. 285. 32. Lake of Æthiopia. ]—Ver. 320. Possibly these may be the
waters of trial, mentioned by Porphyry, as being used among the Indians.
He says, that, according to their influence on the person accused, when
drunk of by him, he was acquitted or condemned. 33. Clitorian spring. ]—Ver. 322. Clitorium was a town of
Arcadia. Pliny the Elder, quoting from Varro, mentions the quality here
referred to. 34. Son of Amithaon. ]—Ver. 325. Melampus, the physician, the
son of Amithaon, cured Mera, Euryale, Lysippe, and Iphianassa, the
daughters of Prœtus, king of Argos, of madness, which Venus was said to
have inflicted on them for boasting of their superior beauty. Their
derangement consisted in the fancy that they were changed into cows.
Melampus afterwards married Iphianassa. He was said to have employed the
herb hellebore in the cure, which thence obtained the name of
‘melampodium.’ 35. Lyncestis. ]—Ver. 329. The Lyncesti were the people of the
town of Lyncus, in Epirus. This stream flowed past that place. 36. Pheneos. ]—Ver. 332. Pheneos was the name of a town of
Arcadia, afterwards called ‘Nonacris.’ In its neighbourhood, according
to Pausanias, was a rock, from which water oozed drop by drop, which the
Greeks called ‘the water of Styx.’ At certain periods it was said to be
fatal to men and cattle, to break vessels with which it came in contact,
and to melt all metals. Ovid is the only author that mentions the
difference in its qualities by day and by night. 37. Ortygia. ]—Ver. 337. Ortygia, or Deloe, was said to have
floated till it was made fast by Jupiter as a resting-place for Latona,
when pregnant with Apollo and Diana. The Symplegades, or Cyanean
Islands, were also said to have formerly floated. 38. Far Northern Pallene. ]—Ver. 356. Pallene was the name of a
mountain and a city of Thrace. Tritonis was a lake in the neighbourhood.
Vibius Sequester says, ‘When a person has nine times bathed himself in
the Tritonian lake, in Thrace, he is changed into a bird.’ The
continuous fall of fleecy snow in that neighbourhood is supposed by some
to have given rise to the story. 39. Give any credit. ]—Ver. 361. This was a very common notion
among the ancients. See the story of Aristæus and the recovery of his
bees, in the Fourth Book of Virgil’s Georgics, I. 281-314. It is also
told by Ovid in the Fasti, Book I. l. 377. 40. The warlike steed. ]—Ver. 368. Pliny the Elder, Nicander,
and Varro state that bees and hornets are produced from the carcase of
the horse. Pliny also says, that beetles are generated by the putrefying
carcase of the ass. 41. Deadly moth. ]—Ver. 374. Pliny, in the twenty-eighth Book of
his History, says, ‘The moth, too, that flies at the flame of the lamp,
is numbered among the bad potions,’ evidently alluding to their being
used in philtres or incantations. There is a kind called the death’s
head moth; but it is so called simply from the figure of a skull, which
appears very exactly represented on its body, and not on account of any
noxious qualities known to be inherent in it. 42. Deprived of feet. ]—Ver. 376. He alludes to frogs when in
the tadpole state. 43. Not a cub. ]—Ver. 379. This was long the common belief.
Pliny says, speaking of the cub of the bear, ‘These are white and
shapeless lumps of flesh, a little bigger than mice, without eyes,
and without hair; the claws, however, are prominent. These the dams by
degrees reduce to shape.’ 44. Into a serpent. ]—Ver. 390. Pliny tells the same story; and
Antigonus (on Miracles, ch. 96) goes still further, and says, that the
persons to whom this happens, after death, are able to smell the snakes
while they are yet alive. The fiction, very probably, was invented with
the praiseworthy object of securing freedom from molestation for the
bones of the dead. 45. Changes its sex. ]—Ver. 408. Pliny mentions it as a vulgar
belief that the hyæna is male and female in alternate years. Aristotle
took the pains to confute this silly notion. 46. Which feeds upon. ]—Ver. 411. The idea that the chameleon
subsists on wind and air, arose from the circumstance of its sitting
with its mouth continually open, that it may catch flies and small
insects, its prey. That it changes colour according to the hue of the
surrounding objects, is a fact well known. It receives its name from the
Greek χάμαι λέων ,
‘The lion on the ground.’ 47. Changed into stone. ]—Ver. 415. Pliny says, that this
becomes hard, and turns into gems, like the carbuncle, being of a fiery
tint, and that the stone has the name of ‘lyncurium.’ Beckmann (Hist.
Inventions) thinks that this was probably the jacinth, or hyacinth,
while others suppose it to have been the tourmaline, or transparent
amber. 48. A soft plant. ]—Ver. 417. Modern improvement in knowledge
has shown that coral is not a plant, but an animal substance. 49. Sparta was famed. ]—Ver. 426-30. These lines are looked upon
by many Commentators as spurious, as they are omitted in most MSS.
Besides, all these cities were flourishing in the time of Pythagoras. If they are
genuine, Ovid is here guilty of a series of anachronisms. 50. But one born. ]—Ver. 447. This was Octavius, the adopted son
of Julius Cæsar. According to Suetonius, he traced his descent, through
his mother, from Ascanius or Iülus. 51. Ought not to fill. ]—Ver. 462. Clarke’s quaint translation
is, ‘And let us not cram our g—ts with Thyestian victuals.’ 52. Feather foils. ]—Ver. 475. He alludes to the ‘formido;’
which was made of coloured feathers, and was used to scare the deer into
the toils. 53. Voluntarily invited. ]—Ver. 481. He was living at the Sabine
town of Cures, when the throne was pressed upon him by the desire of
both the Roman and the Sabine nations. 54. City of Pittheus. ]—Ver. 506. Pittheus was the son of
Pelops, and the father of Æthra, the mother of Theseus; consequently he
was the great-grandfather of Hippolytus. 55. Phlegethon. ]—Ver. 532. This was said to be one of the
rivers of the Infernal Regions, and to be flowing with fire and
brimstone. 56. Pæonian aid. ]—Ver. 536. Pæon was a skilful physician,
mentioned by Homer, in the Fifth Book of the Iliad. Eustathius thinks
that Apollo is meant under that name. 57. Virbius. ]—Ver. 544. This name is formed from the words
‘vir’ and ‘bis,’ twice a man. 58. Am I devoted. ]—Ver. 546. In the same relation to her as
Adonis was to Venus, Ericthonius to Minerva, and Atys to Cybele. 59. Son of the Amazon. ]—Ver. 552. Hippolytus was the son either
of the Amazon Hippolyta, or Antiope. 60. Slender pine. ]—Ver. 603-4. The words ‘succinctis pinetis’
are rendered by Clarke, ‘the neat pine-groves.’ 61. The tripod. ]—Ver. 635. The tripod on which the priestess of
Apollo or ‘Pythia,’ sat when inspired, was called ‘Cortina,’ from the
skin, ‘corium,’ of the serpent Python, which, when it had been killed by
Apollo was used to cover it. 62. Epidaurus. ]—Ver. 643. There were several towns of this
name. The one here mentioned was in the state of Argolis. 63. Polished steps. ]—Ver. 685. Clarke translates ‘Gradibus
nitidis,’ ‘the neat steps.’ 64. Is conspicuous aloft. ]—Ver. 697. ‘Deus eminet alte.’ This
is rendered by Clarke, ‘The God rears up to a good height.’ 65. Scylacean. ]—Ver. 702. Scylace was a town on the Calabrian
coast; it was said to have been founded by an Athenian colony. 66. Amphissian. ]—Ver. 703. Amphissia was the name of a city of
Locris; but that cannot be the place here alluded to on the coast of
Italy. It is most probably a corrupt reading. 67. Caulon. ]—Ver. 705. Caulon was a colony of the Achæa on the
coast of Calabria. Narycia, or Naritium, or Naricia, was also a town on
the Calabrian coast. The localities of Ceraunia and Romechium are not
known. 68. Leucosia. ]—Ver. 708. Leucosia was a little island off the
town of Pæstum, which was in Lucania; it was famous for its mild
climate, and the beauty of its roses, which are celebrated by
Virgil. 69. Capreæ. ]—Ver. 709. Capreæ was an island near the coast of
Naples. 70. Surrentine. ]—Ver. 710. Surrentum was a city of Campania,
famed for its wines. 71. City of Hercules. ]—Ver. 711. This was Herculaneum, at the
foot of Vesuvius; the place which shared so disastrous a fate from the
eruption of that mountain. 72. Stabiæ. ]—Ver. 711. This was a town of Campania, which was
destroyed by Sylla in the Social war. It was afterwards rebuilt. 73. The warm springs. ]—Ver. 711. He alludes to the city of
Baiæ, famed for its warm springs and baths. 74. Linternum. ]—Ver. 714. This place was in Campania. It was
famous as the place of retirement of the elder Scipio; he was buried
there. 75. Vulturnus. ]—Ver. 715. This was a river of Campania, which
flowed past the city of Capua. 76. Snow-white snakes. ]—Ver. 715. Sinuessa was a town of
Campania; Heinsius very properly suggests ‘columbis,’ ‘doves;’ for ‘ colubris,’ ‘snakes.’ We
are told by Pliny the Elder, that Campania was famed for its doves. 77. Minturnæ. ]—Ver. 716. This was a town of Latium; the marshes
in its neighbourhood produced pestilential exhalations. 78. She for whom. ]—Ver. 716. This was Caieta, who, being buried
there by her foster-child Æneas, gave her name to the spot. 79. Abode of Antiphates. ]—Ver. 717. Formiæ. 80. Trachas. ]—Ver. 717. This place was also called ‘Anxur.’ Its
present name is Terracina. Livy mentions it as lying in the marshes. 81. Antium. ]—Ver. 718. This was the capital of the ancient
Volscians . 82. Castrum. ]—Ver. 727. This was ‘Castrum Inui,’ or ‘the tents
of Pan;’ an old town of the Rutulians. 83. Numidians. ]—Ver. 754. The Numidians under Syphax, together
with Juba, King of Mauritania, aided Cato, Scipio, and Petreius, who had
been partizans of Pompey, against Julius Cæsar, and were conquered by
him. 84. Pontus. ]—Ver. 756. Cæsar conquered Pharnaces, the son of
Mithridates, king of Pontus, in one battle. It was on this occasion,
according to Suetonius, that his despatch was in the words, ‘Veni, Vidi,
Vici ,’ ‘I came, I saw, I conquered.’ 85. Son of Atreus. ]—Ver. 805. This was Menelaüs, from whom
Paris was saved by Venus. See the Iliad, book III. 86. Mutina. ]—Ver. 823. This was a place in Cisalpine Gaul,
where Augustus defeated Antony, and took his camp. 87. Philippi. ]—Ver. 824. Pharsalia was in Thessaly, and
Philippi was in Thrace. He uses a poet’s license, in treating them as
being the same battle-field, as they both formed part of the former
kingdom of Macedonia. Pompey was defeated by Julius Cæsar at Pharsalia,
while Brutus and Cassius were defeated by Augustus and Antony at
Philippi. The fleet of the younger Pompey was totally destroyed off the
Sicilian coast. 88. The wife. ]—Ver. 826. Mark Antony was so infatuated as to
divorce his wife, Octavia, that he might be enabled to marry
Cleopatra. 89. Canopus. ]—Ver. 828. This was a city of Egypt, situate on
the Western mouth of the river Nile. 90. His hallowed wife. ]—Ver. 836. Augustus took Livia Drusilla,
while pregnant, from her husband, Tiberius Nero, and married her. He
adopted her son Tiberius, and constituted him his successor. 91. With like years. ]—Ver. 838. Julius Cæsar was slain when he
was fifty-six years old. Augustus died in his seventy-sixth year. 92. Threefold world. ]—Ver. 859. This is explained as meaning
the realms of the heavens, the æther and the air; but it is difficult to
guess exactly what is the Poet’s meaning here. 93. Companions of Æneas. ]—Ver. 861. He probably refers to the
Penates which Æneas brought into Latium. Dionysius of Halicarnassus says
that he had seen them in a temple at Rome, and that they bore the
figures of two youths seated and holding spears. Supplementary Notes ( added by transcriber ) A. If any thing is noxious: Word “If” missing from text, with no
blank space. Latin reads “siqua nocent”. B. The line-endings of this footnote are missing, apparently through
printing error. Reconstructed text, bracketed in the main footote, is
here shown in red; the preceding line is included to show line length.
The word given as “then” might be “also” or any word of similar
length: The remainder of the footnote, beginning “hands being...”, is on the
following page. THE END. London: Printed by William Clowes and Sons, Limited, Stamford Street and Charing Cross. More about the text Ovid’s Metamorphoses , translated by Henry Thomas Riley
(1816-1878, B.A. 1840, M.A. 1859), was originally published in 1851 as
part of Bohn’s Classical Library. This e-text, covering Books VIII-XV,
is
based on the 1893 George Bell reprint (London, 1893, one volume). The
edition describes itself as “reprinted from the stereotype plates”.
These may have been the original 1851 plates; the Classical
Library was sold to Bell & Daldy, later George Bell. Line Numbers Line numbers from the Latin poem—not its prose
translation—were printed as headnotes on each page. In this
e-text, line numbers appear in the left margin, across from the page
numbers. Line numbers used in footnotes are retained from the original
text; these, too, refer to the Latin poem and are independent of line
divisions in the translation. Errors and Inconsistencies Typographical errors have been marked with mouse-hover popups , with a few exceptions: Hyphenization is inconsistent—for example, the forms “sea
monster” and “sea-monster” both occur—and is not marked unless one
form is clearly anomalous. Errors and omissions in Greek diacritical
marks have been silently corrected. Variant Names This is not intended to be a complete list. Dieresis is unpredictable; forms such as “Alcathöe” and “Pirithöus”
are common, and have been silently corrected. Since the ligatures “æ”
and “œ” are used consistently, dieresis in “oe” and “ae” can be assumed
even when not explicitly indicated. Treatment of names in Ia- (pronounced as two syllables) is
inconsistent. Iäsion and Iänthe are regularly written with
dieresis, while Iarbas , Iapyx , Iapygia are written
without. The forms “Lapithean” and “Lapithæan” both occur. The “Lilybœus” of Books I-VII is now correctly written “Lilybæus”,
but Erysichthon (with y or upsilon) is written “Erisicthon”. As in Books I-VII, spellings in “-cth-” (Erisicthon, Erectheus)
are used consistently in place of “-chth-” (-χθ-). Similarly, Phaëthon
is written “Phaëton”. Footnote Numbering Numbers begin from 1 in each Book. Almost all Books had duplications
in the sequence, usually in the form “17*”; some had omissions. In this
e-text, footnotes have been renumbered consecutively within each Book,
without duplication. Simple printing errors, such as missing or
incorrect tags, have been marked where they occur in the text, and are
not listed here. Book Note VIII 39-79 printed as 38*, 39-78 80-101 printed as 78*, 79-99 IX 49-80 printed as 48*, 49-79 X 50-65 50 omitted, printed as 51-66 66 67 omitted, printed as 68 XI 36-63 printed as 35*, 36-62 XII 49-55 49 omitted, printed as 50-56 XIII 31-41 31 omitted, printed as 32-42 42-51 printed as 42*, 43-51 52-78 52 omitted, printed as 53-79 XIV 19 footnote and tag misprinted as 17 20-27 printed as 18-25 28-32 26 omitted, printed as 27-31 33-41 32 omitted, printed as 33-41 42-63 42 omitted, printed as 43-64 XV 9-11 9 omitted, printed as 10-12 12-33 13 omitted, printed as 14-35 34-63 printed as 35*, 36-64 64-84 printed as 64*, 65-84 85-93 85 omitted, printed as 86-94